{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl725\margr1108\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn725\margrsxn7262\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw720\colsr391\colno2\colw2810 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb55\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs14 XVI}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn728\margrsxn1118\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 {\pard\plain \sb650\sa0\sl-1\slmult0\fs2\par}\sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn728\margrsxn1118\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw1543\colsr1327\colno2\colw7192 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb1003\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Hunter}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb2021\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Macdonald}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb2520\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Moser}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb1250\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Rieger}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb3007\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Thomas}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 229), in which she indicates that \i 1831 Joseph \i0 introduced six textual errors and that then \i 1818 Macdonald \i0 incorrectly listed these six errors as 2832 variants of the \i 1818 \i0 text; and "Silent Corrections" (pages 230-231).]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb247\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Shelley. \i Frankenstein: The \expndtw12 1818\expndtw0  Text, Contexts, Nineteenth-Century Responses, Modern Criticism. \i0 Ed. J. Paul Hunter. (A Norton Critical Edition.) New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1996. [Among the other texts that Hunter reprints are: "The Composition of \i Frankenstein" \i0 from 2832 \i Joseph; \i0 Mellor, "Text"; PBS's 1832 \i Athenceum \i0 review of \i Frankenstein; \i0 and partial texts of the 1818 reviews in \i Quarterly Review, Edinburgh Magazine \i0 (confused with \i Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine \i0 and the review misattributed to Scott), and \i Gentleman's Magazine\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 and of the 1824 review in \i Knight\super 3\nosupersub s Quarterly.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri12\sb245\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. \i Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (The 1818 version). \i0 Ed. D. L. Macdonald & Kathleen Scherf. (Broadview Literary Texts.) Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press, 1994. [Among the other texts that Macdonald and Scherf reprint are: passages from the works by Volney, Goethe, Plutarch, and Milton that the monster read; and partial texts of the 1818 reviews of \i Frankenstein \i0 in \i Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Edinburgh Maga\-zine, \i0 and \i Quarterly Review. \i0 Omissions in Macdonald and Scherf s "Appendix F: Substantive Variants in the 1831 Edition" (pages 317-359) are noted by Ketterer, "Readings," page 34; and "unauthorized variants" in this appendix (apparently traceable to errors in \i 1831 Joseph) \i0 are listed in \i\expndtw12 1818\expndtw0  Crook, \i0 page 229.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri12\sb247\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Shelley. \i Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus. The 1818 Text in three volumes. \i0 Illustrated by Barry Moser and with essays by Ruth Mortimer, Emily Sunstein, Joyce Carol Oates, and William St. Clair. West Hatfield: Pennyroyal, 1983. [Reprinted in paper, but without the Mortimer, Sunstein, and St. Clair essays, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb247\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. \i Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus: The 1818 Text (with variant readings, an Introduction, and Notes). \i0 Ed. James Rieger. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press (Phoenix Edition), 1982. [This impor\-tant edition (initially published in the Library of Literature, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1974) was the first to print a "Collation of the Texts of 1818 and 1831" and the first to record the autograph variants in \i 1818 Thomas \i0 (which Rieger incorporated into the \expndtw17 2828\expndtw0  text). The 1974 edition was first reprinted (with different pagination and lineation) by New York: Pocket Books, 1976. The 1982 Chicago reprint, however, is to be preferred because it corrects "minor errors in the introduction and apparatus" andlists "some additional 1818/ 1831 variants at the end of the volume"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 the " Collation" is printed on pages 230-259 and (288).]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri2\sb247\sa0\sl-252\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The copy of the first edition of 2 82 8 (Pierpont Morgan Library, PML 16799) that MWS corrected, annotated, and presented to Mrs. Thomas in Genoa in [?July] 1823.}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn735\margrsxn1108\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 {\pard\plain \sb245\sa0\sl-1\slmult0\fs2\par}\sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn735\margrsxn1108\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw1125\colsr1747\colno2\colw7192 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb17\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 2828 \i Wolf-1}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The Annotated Frankenstein. (Frankenstein \i0 by Mary Shelley; Introduction and Notes by Leonard Wolf.) With Maps, Drawing, and Photographs. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, Inc./Publishers, 1977. [This edition prints a photofacsimiie of 2828, but the copy chosen for microfilming (together with a flawed photo-offset}\par }