{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl390\margr1038\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn8277\margrsxn1038\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw1192\colsr682\colno2\colw720 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Short Titles}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 xxi}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn390\margrsxn1422\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 {\pard\plain \sb583\sa0\sl-1\slmult0\fs2\par}\sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn390\margrsxn1422\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw2176\colsr703\colno2\colw7216 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb1003\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Medwin}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb773\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mellor}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb1020\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mellor, "Text'\super :}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb768\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Murray, \i adds. c. 4}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb1764\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Murray, "Changes"}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb514\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Murray, "Contribution\super 5}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb511\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Murray, \i d. 1}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb1519\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 MWS \i Dramas}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb1258\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 MWS \i History}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb1008\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 MWS \i Journal}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri31\sb0\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 in English Romantic Literature, \i0 ed. Donald H. Reiman, Michael C. Jaye, and Betty T. Bennett, with the assistance of Doucet Devin Fischer and Ricki B. Herzfeld (New York: New York University Press, 1978), pages 236-263.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri34\sb250\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Thomas Medwin. \i The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley \i0 ("Revised Life"). With an Introduction and Commentary by H. Buxton Forman. London: Oxford University Press, 1913.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri31\sb252\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Anne K. Mellor. \i Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters. \i0 New York: Methuen, 1988. [Mellor treats of the collaboration between MWS and PBS in her third chapter, "My Hideous Progeny," as well as in her appendix, "Percy Shelley's Revisions of the Manuscript \i oi Frankenstein."]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri36\sb254\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Anne K. Mellor. "Choosing a Text of \i Frankenstein \i0 to Teach," in \i Approaches to Teaching Shelley's \i0 Frankenstein, ed. Stephen C. Behrendt (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1990), pages 31-37.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri36\sb247\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Miscellaneous Poetry, Prose and Translations from Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. c. 4, etc.: Including fair copies of "Misery.\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\i\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 a fragment," "Ode to Naples," "To a faded violet," "Letter on Richard Carlisle," "Una Favola"; Drafts of "Specula\-tions on Morals and Metaphysics," "The Coliseum," "On Vegetarianism"; Translations of Goethe's "Faust"; Along with Fifty Beta-radiograph Reproduc\-tions of Relevant Watermarks. \i0 Ed. E. B. Murray. (The Bodleian Shelley Manu\-scripts, Volume XXL) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1995.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri38\sb250\sa0\sl-245\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 E. B. Murray. "Changes in the 1823 Edition of \i Frankenstein\i0 ," \i The Library, \i0 6th Series, 3 (1981): 320-327.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri34\sb252\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 E. B. Murray. "Shelley's Contribution to Mary's \i Frankenstein,'" Keats-Shelley Memorial Bulletin \i0 29 (1978): 50-68.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri36\sb247\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 A Facsimile of Bodleian MS. Shelley d. 1, Including Drafts \i0 of Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics, A Defence of Poetry, Ode to Naples, The Witch of Atlas, Epipsychidion, \i and Mary Woilstone craft Shelley's \i0 The Fields of Fancy/Mathilda, \i together with minor poems, fragments, and prose writings. \i0 Ed. E. B. Murray. Parts One and Two. (The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume IV.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1988.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri0\sb252\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: Mythological Dramas: \i0 Proserpine \i and \i0 Midas, \i Bodleian MS. Shelley d. 2. \i0 Ed. Charles E. Robinson. [Together with \i Relation of the Death of the Family of the Cenci, Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. e. 13, \i0 ed. Betty T. Bennett.] (The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume X.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1992.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri24\sb247\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 History of a Six Weeks' Tour through a Part of France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland: with Letters Descriptive of a Sail round the Lake of Geneva, and of the Glaciers ofChamouni. \i0 London: T. Hookham, Jun., and C. and J. Oilier, 1817. [A photofacsimile of this edition was published by Oxford: Woodstock Books, 1989.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The journals of Mary Shelley. \i0 Ed. Paula R. Feldman and Diana Scott-Kilvert. 2}\par }