{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1483\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1483\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1099 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xxviii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-4\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb648\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 text together with the \i 1818 \i0 text and extensive notes on each transcription page. Consequently, facing pages in this edition will allow the reader to see the manuscript photofacsimile on a verso that is faced by a recto containing not only the type facsimile of the manuscript but also a literal transcript \i of 1818 as \i0 well as a textual apparatus in the form of footnotes, all of which discrete yet interrelated parts are described in greater detail below.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri29\sb240\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Manuscript Photofacsimile Pages (versos)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri2\sb182\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The verso pages are used to reproduce in photofacsimile the 369 \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscript pages (some of them more than once) that were photographed by the Photographic Department of the Bodleian Library, Oxford University, in 1993 and then printed by Garland in 1994 and again in 1995 (the reprocessed 1995 prints, which provided much greater resolution, were used for the photofacsimiles in this edition). These manuscript pages originated in the following notebooks: the \i 1816-17 \i0 Draft in hard-cover Notebooks A (in Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep.c. 534/1) and B (in Dep. c. 534/1); the \i 181\i0 7 Fair Copy in soft-cover Notebooks CI andC2 (both in Dep. c. 534/2). All of the covers have long been discarded: those on the Draft Notebooks possibly in April/May 1817 when the Draft was transcribed into the Fair Copy; and those on the Fair-Copy Notebooks most likely in September-November 1817 when the Fair Copy was used as printer's copy. (In those places where individual manuscript pages are also missing, the size of each missing section is represented by the \i 1818 \i0 text occupying the full width of a verso and/or recto in this edition, in effect substituting for the more typical photofacsimile/ transcription opening.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Headers: The headers at the top of each manuscript photofacsimile page identify the manuscript of \i Frankenstein \i0 by reference to the Bodleian shelfmark (Deposit number) and the folio number (whether verso or recto), and this physical place in the manuscript is then equaled to the conceptual place in the novel (whether Draft or Fair Copy; whether Notebook A or B or CI or C2): for example, Dep. c. 534/1, folio 37 verso=Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, page 98 [Notebook B] means that this manuscript page may be found in the Bodleian Library, in Dep. c. 534/1, on folio 37 verso, a point in the \i 1816-17 \i0 Draft of a two-volume novel that MWS had designated Volume II, Chapter 10, page 98. (It should be remarked here that Notebooks A and B do not correspond exactly to Volumes I and II of the Draft and that neither of these divisions corresponds exactly with Dep. c. 477/1 and 534/1.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi350\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 All readers are encouraged to use the header at the top of each photofacsimile page together with the header at the top of each transcription page (for which, see below) as a guide to just where they are in no less than five "places," the most important of which is the novel MWS conceived and drafted in 1816-17. The diagram below may simplify what is a set of very complicated relationships, but I ask the reader's patience to consider first that the two physical Notebooks A and B are paginated not as notebooks but as a two-volume novel. Consider, for example, that the draft of Volume I of the novel concludes not at the end but rather in the midst of Notebook A, at a point (MWS's page 160, a verso) where MWS would soon turn another page: she left blank her next page 161, a recto; then she immediately began the draft of Volume II on the next page (a verso), which she paginated with the number "1" although the preceding page in the same notebook was "161." (A verso is an unusual place both for a page 1 and for the beginning of a new Volume, either of which would ordinarily be graced by a recto or a right-hand page.) Complicating this matter further is that the division between the two Bodleian deposits of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks in 1974 and 1976 comes close to but does not quite equal the division between Volumes I and II of the Draft novel: the reader will encounter one photofacsimile with the header "266 De\ul p.c. 477/1\ul0 , folio 62 verso=Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 160 [Notebook A]" that is followed by the next photofacsimile with the header \i "268 \i0\ul Dep. c. 534/1\ul0 , folio 1 recto=Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 161 [Notebook A]," thereby showing that Lord Abinger's two Bodleian deposits not only divide parts of one notebook but also divide parts of one volume of a novel that MWS had paginated successively. Put simply, the Abinger and Bodleian division of Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep. c. 534/1 does not equal the physical division of Notebooks A and B, nor does either of these divisions quite equal MWS's conceptual division of Draft Volumes I and II. These divisions, yet again complicated by the three-volume division of th\super e}\par }