{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1466\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1466\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1097 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xxxii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li365\fi0\ri22\sb643\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 the \i 1816-17 \i0 Draft text. A quick visual comparison of these parallel texts will show the places of major alteration between the Draft and \i 1818: \i0 see especially pages 449 and 459 in this edition for places where MWS and/or PBS made extensive changes late in the proof stage; see also the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 20 October, for [22] October, and for 28 October 1817.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li370\fi353\ri19\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Where no manuscript is extant, the \i 1818 \i0 text is still reproduced diplomatically but without reference to any manuscript. By including these portions of \i 181 \i0 <\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a7\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 , the reader can both "see" the proportion of text missing from manuscript and have at hand a complete \i\expndtw13 1818\expndtw0  \i0 text to compare with other texts.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li367\fi0\ri26\sb70\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Page Numbers: The page numbers in \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  \i0 are in bold, bracketed and placed in the literal transcript to show the [number:]beginning of a page, even if the page breaks over a hyphenated word (see, e.g., transcription page 17 in this edition).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li370\fi0\ri22\sb86\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dagger: A f follows any word, number, or punctuation mark in the literal transcript of 182 \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a7\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  that is glossed in the footnotes, the note being preceded by "\ul 1818\ul0  texfcline number]".}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li365\fi0\ri24\sb77\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Paragraph Symbol: A \i f \i0 is added in the transcript of \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  \i0 to make more evident the beginning of each paragraph (excepting the first paragraph in each chapter that is signaled by a display word).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li365\fi0\ri24\sb62\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Double Quotation Marks: The ordinary double quotation marks in CG Times (" ") are altered in the literal transcript to curved quotation marks (" ") in an attempt to replicate those in \i 1818.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Headers: The headers for each page locate the reader in the manuscript text (whether \i 1816-17 \i0 Draft or \i 1817 \i0 Fair Copy) and in the \i 1818 \i0 text. More important, the headers enable the reader to witness the restructuring of a two-volume novel in Draft (through a three-volume novel in Fair Copy, most of which has to be extrapolated from the other evidence) into a three-volume first edition in \i 1818. \i0 In the act of fair copying her text, MWS actually changed the beginning and endings of many chapters as she restructured her novel. That restructuring is made evident in the headers for each transcription page: see, for example, transcription page \i 69 \i0 where the beginning of Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 5, page 61 has become the beginning of 1818: Vol. I, Ch. HI, pages 78-79; or transcription page 473 where Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 12, page 118 has been divided into 1818: Volume III, Chs. \b Il-in, \b0 pages 38-40. In this latter example, MWS's manuscript note to herself to "Finish Chap. 2 here" directly shows how she restructured the two-volume Draft into the three-volume Fair Copy. The reader should also note how nearly identical the pagination is between the three-volume Fair Copy and the three-volume \i 1818: \i0 see, e.g., the header on transcription page 749 in this edition: Fair Copy: Vol. Ill, Ch. VH, page 175 [=] 1818: Vol. IH, Ch. VII, pages 176-178.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri12\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Notes: The format and the extent of the notes are in part determined by the limitation of space, but footnotes rather than endnotes are used in order to make all relevant information available on facing pages of this edition. I have attempted to serve simultaneously, as much as possible, the principles of clarity, economy, and consistency. The different fonts used for MWS and PBS in the type facsimile of the manuscript mean that I did not have to footnote each place PBS wrote in the manuscript, but I do identify as PBS's any of his words or passages that are discussed in the notes (e.g., \i "PBS \i0 ing \i overlays MWS \i0 ed \i in \i0 examining").}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li372\fi0\ri10\sb62\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 MWS and PBS in Notes: Unless identified as PBS's (or someone else's), all words or marks discussed in the footnotes are MWS's. Words conjecturally printed as MWS's in the type facsimile are footnoted with "?MWS"; those conjecturally printed as PBS's are footnoted with "?PBS."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li377\fi0\ri0\sb70\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Order of Notes: Each note, preceded by location (whether page position or line number) and a closing bracket (both set in bold) is arranged in the following order: preceding page(s)]; entire page]; left edge]; top of page]; right edge]; bottom of page]; margin:sequential line number(s) from type facsimile]; sequential line number(s) from type facsimile]; \ul 1818\ul0  text: sequential line number(s) from type facsimile]; following page(s)].}\par }