{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1474\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1474\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xxxiv        \i0\scaps The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri17\sb631\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 Appendix C}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri24\sb192\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Appendix C reproduces the four photofacsimiles of MWS's Cyrus Fragment that accompanied the \i Franken\-stein \i0 manuscripts when they were deposited in the Bodleian Library in 1974 and in 1976. These two leaves, which are foliated in Dep. c. 477/1 (folio 63) and 534/1 (folio \i 95), \i0 may have been linked to the \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts long before they came to the Bodleian.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li7\fi0\ri0\sb242\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 Emendations to and Anomalies in the \i0\scaps0 1818 \i\scaps Text}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri10\sb187\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Incorporating the literal transcript \i of 1818 \i0 into this edition has raised new questions about The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks and their relations to the first edition. In answering some of these questions, I decided not to emend \i 1818 \i0 and instead to print a hypothetically reconstructed and uncorrected \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  \i0 that would serve and be served by the Draft and Fair Copy. Seeing these texts in parallel columns enables the reader to understand part of the process by which the manscript was transformed into a book and to discover possible printing errors, even though most of the Fair Copy that was used as printer's copy is now missing. For example, seeing the word "lurid" in the Draft photofacsimile and type facsimile and the word "livid" in \i 1818 \i0 (see pages 98-99 in this edition) leads to a strong suspicion that either MWS in the now missing Fair Copy or the compositor in the now missing proof mistakenly transformed the Draft "lurid" into the printed "livid." Of course, I have the luxury in this edition of merely suggesting rather than the more difficult task of making such emendations, but the reader should be able to determine most of those that I am making in a new edition of \i Frankenstein. \i0 In all, there are nearly 100 places (each signaled by a dagger in the \i 1818 \i0 column of this edition) where the text needs emending because of misprintings (e.g., "Williamhad"), misspellings (e.g., "guished"),mispunctuations (e.g., missing quotation marks or periods that should be question marks), broken or missing type (e.g., the "Then" and comma that are missing from many copies of \i 181 \i0 <\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'a7\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 ), or MWS errors in her Draft and Fair Copy (e.g., the name "Cower" rather than "Goring"). (For these particular printing and/or textual errors, see pages 49, 107, 157, 203, 283, and 459 in this edition.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi350\ri19\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The dagger is also used in a number of other places in the \i 1818 \i0 text in order to signal and address (1) each of the emendations (six of which I dispute) that Ketterer has suggested in his article "Readings" and (2) the fourteen places where \i 1818 Wolf-1 \i0 misrepresents the \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  \i0 text and/or introduces new errors into the text. For the relevant pages in this edition, see the entries in my list of "Short Titles" for \i 1818 Wolf-1 \i0 and for Ketterer "Readings." I supply these specifics about \i 1818 Wolf-1 \i0 in order to prevent that not-so-faithful photofacsimile from being the source of future errors.\super 14}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li5\fi0\ri0\sb242\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 The Makeup of The \i0 Frankenstein \i Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li2088\fi0\ri2093\sb72\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (Quiring Charts and technical descriptions below are based on a text originally prepared by Dr. B. C. Barker-Benfield.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi355\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The remnants of the original \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks tell a fascinating tale about the way that MWS created her novel. Part of this tale is evident in the preceding advice on how to use this edition, and the fullest expression of the narrative about these notebooks is to be found in the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" that concludes this Introduction. Here, however, the technical details about the number and makeup of these notebooks at least provide an outline to the creative process involved in the making of \i Frankenstein. \i0 The technical details concerning each of the four extant notebooks are presented separately below, but it is worth mentioning here that all four of these notebooks in which MWS drafted and then fair copied her novel in 1816-17 were originally bound; that the bindings and the covers of all four notebooks have long since disappeared; that the surviving manuscripts in the Abinger papers are all loose leaves, all of which are "singletons" (i.e., single leaves), with the exception of two bifolia that are still joined; and that watermarks, torn edges, glue residue along some edges, sewing holes, and wet offset ink blots provide sufficient evidence by which to reconstruct the original makeup of the quires in each of these notebooks. Moreover, the very nature of the}\par }