{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl577\margr1225\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn577\margrsxn1225\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7658\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9629 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xxxv}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li43\fi0\ri5\sb619\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 writing in these notebooks proves that JVtWS drafted and fair copied her novel (and that PBS made his changes and suggested his alterations) while the notebooks were still intact: each main group of now detached leaves includes at least one reconstructed bifolium where the writing overlaps across the two halves; the writing at what would have been the inside edges of some versos displays a wavering and a trailing off, indicating that the writer's hand was impeded by the gutter of the still bound notebook; the writing at the outside edges of the rectos frequently carries over to the outside edge(s) of what would have been the notebook's next leaf (or leaves), a very natural effect when a large volume is splayed open during the process of writing; now missing leaves that were apparently discarded during the composition process have sometimes left wet offset ink blots, suggesting that the leaves were torn from a bound notebook; and different leaves from later quires or from other sources were sometimes inserted into the main sequence of pages in such a way (leaving the evidence of wet offset ink blots or pin holes) to indicate that the main sequence of pages was bound in a notebook. All of this evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion that \i Frankenstein \i0 was drafted and fair copied in notebooks that were purchased as ready-made, bound blankbooks from commercial stationers in England or abroad. Further details about the size and source of the notebooks, the type of covers, the number of pages in each quire, the watermarks, and other particulars are provided separately for each notebook below.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li22\fi0\ri0\sb233\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Draft Notebook A}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li62\fi312\ri0\sb96\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (Dep. c. 477/1, folios 4-28a, 28b-62; Dep. c. 534/1, folios l-17=Pages 10-15, 26-31, 36-339 in this edition) \expndtw-2 (With Dep. c. 477/1 insert folios 1-3 and Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 18=Pages 16-25, 32-35, 340-341 in this edition)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li46\fi0\ri7\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Paper, Watermarks, and Covers: Notebook A survives as 77 leaves of continental laid paper with a light-blue tint, with edges that were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 270-271 x 186-187 mm., yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 270-271 x 372-374 mm., and a minimum whole-sheet size of 372-374 x 540-542 mm. The leaves were made up into a quarto notebook, with each of the two watermarks split across the}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li46\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 reconstructed folds: from the "mould" side, the watermarks read D I ADIVONNE; the countermark is a bell}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li48\fi0\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 1-2; 3-4). There are five sewing holes visible, with three main stations (for cords?) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at the top and bottom. Glue residue at the gutters on outside leaves of quires not only confirm the quiring-structure of the notebook, but also indicate a substantial professional binding with hard covers. The continental paper of the notebook suggests that it was purchased abroad, probably in Geneva or its environs. There are no other examples of this paper in the Bodleian Shelley collections.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li53\fi0\ri0\sb250\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Date of Notebook A: ([August or September]-[?December] 1816): If MWS purchased this notebook in Geneva, she possibly began drafting Walton's introductory Letters into this notebook as early as August 1816; she made her first insertion on or around 28 October 1816; she appears to have finished drafting the part of her novel in Notebook A on or around 5 December 1816, after or while finishing a "very long" chapter on Safie's arrival and her language instruction; and she may have revised and drastically shortened this "very long" Ch. [4] as late as 10-17 or even 29 April 1817 (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for all of these dates), days when she (and probably PBS) made final corrections to the Draft in Notebook A.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb245\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Foliation and Pagination in Notebook A: The Quiring Charts below (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in this notebook. MWS would paginate Jier notebook as she went along,\super 15\nosupersub  ordinarily at the top outside corner of the page (top left on the verso; top right on the recto). Errors that she corrected at once are not of any great significance, but there are some significant alterations in pagination that help us understand her process of composition, particularly as they relate to the forty missing pages (twenty leaves or folios) at the beginning of the notebook (a number of pages sufficient to have contained the missing text\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see the footnote on page 2 in this edition, as well as the footnote on Quire I below. In this instance, there is a strong possibility that MWS's page numbers "41" and "43" and "45" on the first three surviving rectos are alterations from numbers "21" and "22" and "23" respectively,}\par }