{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1486\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1486\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xxxvi        \i0\scaps The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri12\sb643\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 suggesting that she had foliated rather than paginated her notebook up to this point but then decided to enumerate each page (verso page numbers "42" and "44" and "46," as well as recto page number "47" that begins a new chapter, show no sign of having been altered from anything).\super 16}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi353\ri10\sb7\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Surviving leaves of the notebook break off abruptly at the 8th leaf in the 12-leaf Quire IX (see Quiring Charts below)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 at Dep. c. 534/1, folio 11 (pages 20/21)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 a point in the midst of Draft: Vol II, Ch. 3. That abruptness, together with the fact that pages 22-56 are not represented at all in Draft and with the fact that insert/rewrite pages beginning at page "57" are in the same paper as the rest of Notebook A, suggest that there are 35 pages (taking up at least 18 leaves) missing at the end of Notebook A.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi355\ri19\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There are three places in Notebook A where the numerical sequence is out of order: MWS skipped page number "52" when she went from page "51" to "53" (see folio 9 recto and verso); she seemed to have made up for the error when she followed page "58" with another "58" (see folio 12 recto and verso); and she repeated the chapter number "7" (see folios 21 recto and 26 recto)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 for all of these, see pages 48-51, 60-63, 96-97, and 116-117 in this edition.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri17\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ruling in Notebook A: With the exception of the insert/rewrite pages labeled "X" and "Y" (for which see below), all other extant pages of Notebook A have a pencil rule (at varying distances from the left edge), possibly made by MWS at one sitting, to create a left margin so that she and PBS had room to revise the text.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri10\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Insert Pages in Notebook A: Two Insertions into Notebook A, each written on different paper, were foliated by the Bodleian staff at the beginning and the end of the main sequence of notebook pages (Dep. c. 477/1, folios 1-3; Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 16-25, 32-35, and 340-341 in this edition). Each of these Insertions accommodates new text added to text already drafted In Notebook A, and each was most likely Inserted loosely in place in the notebook. There Is also another Insert section in Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 12-17) that was drafted on pages taken from a (presumably) later quire in the notebook. Each of these Insertions was occasioned by a trauma In the text, and each demands further description.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li358\fi0\ri5\sb74\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 First Insert Pages (Dep. c. 477/l\sub 5\nosupersub  folios 1-3): The first six-page insertion was written on three unpaginated consecutive leaves that MWS most likely used before she entered "Write Ch. 3V\sub 2\nosupersub  [altered to 2V\sub 2\nosupersub ]" in her Bath Journal on 27 October 1816 (for an explanation of the circumstances of this insertion, see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for that date; see also pages 16-25 and 32-35 in this edition). The leaves consist of one bifolium (folios 1-2, with the second leaf mutilated) and one singleton (folio 3, a left half-sheet) of laid paper of cream color (dirtied at the edges), with the bifolium sheet measuring 315-318 x 403-404 mm. From the "felt" side of the paper, the left half of the watermarks reads "T W & B I BOTFIELD"; on the right half is Britannia facing left, over the fancy letters "TW&BB " and the date " 1815 " in a crowned triple oval (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. \i 5-6). \i0 The Bodleian Shelley collections have two other certain examples of this same paper, each with identical measurements and the pair of Botfield and 1815 Britannia watermarks.\super 17\nosupersub  Another example of this Botfield paper (watermarked "TW&BB I 1809" rather than "1815"), which was manufactured by the Botfield brothers Thomas, William, and Beriah in the West country\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 provides some evidence that this paper may have been acquired by MWS in Bath,\super 18\nosupersub  where she was residing at the time.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li358\fi0\ri0\sb70\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Second Insert Pages (Dep. c. 534/l\sub 5\nosupersub  folios 12-17\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 the "X" and "Y" inserts): This second insert was written on six leaves that MWS may have used as late as April 1817 when she entered "Correct F." in her Marlow Journal (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below for 10-17 and for 29 April 1817). Because these six leaves of laid paper have the same dimensions, light-blue tint, and watermark that are evidenced in Notebook A and because they exhibit sufficient physical characteristics (identical sewing holes; matching torn edges; pleats at the inner edges of all six leaves, caused either directly by the sewing-thread or by adjacent crumpling), they were most likely three bifolia taken from an unused (the ?last) quire in Notebook A. The fact that two of these reconstructed bifolia give evidence of writing across the inner join leads to an hypothesis involving MWS moving back and forth between two groups of pages here labeled "X"}\par }