{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl693\margr1125\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn693\margrsxn1125\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7850\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9821 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xli}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri50\sb715\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Draft Notebook B}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri31\sb192\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 19-37, 39-94=Pages 342-417, 420-643 in this edition)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri31\sb10\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (With Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 38=Pages 418-419 in this edition)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Paper, Watermarks, and Covers: Notebook B survives as 75 leaves of British laid paper, thickish in weight, cream color, with edges that were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 310-311 x 199-202 mm., yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 310-311 x 398-404 mm. Technically, the notebook was made up Into folio format, with watermarks In the center of each half-sheet. From the "felt" side of the paper, the left half of the sheet has watermarks reading "JL118 06 "; on the right half is Britannia, facing left, In a crowned triple oval (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 7-8). There are eight sewing holes visible in the single intact bifolium (folios 41-42\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 430-435 in this edition), three pairs at three main stations (presumably for broad tapes) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at top and bottom. Glue residue at the gutters on the outside leaves of quires help to confirm the collation structure and suggest a substantial binding with hard covers. When squared up together, the edges of the leaves show traces of blue and red marbling that once decorated all three outside edges of the closed notebook. There are no other examples of this paper in the Bodleian Shelley collections, but a fragment of PBS's "Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics" (see Pforzhelmer SC 339) seems to be on Identical paper.\super 20}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri29\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Date of Notebook B: ([PDecember] 1816-April 1817): If MWS exhausted all or most of the paper in Notebook A on or around 5 December 1816 (see "Date of Notebook A" above), then she probably began Notebook B as early as 6 December 1816. She finished drafting her novel in Notebook B by April 1817, and she (and probably PBS) made final corrections in Draft Notebook B on 10-17 April and, possibly, on 29 April 1817 (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below for all these dates; also see transcription page 419 in this edition for the postmark of 9 April 1817 on the slip of paper on which MWS made one of her last revisions).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Foliation and Pagination in Notebook B: The Quiring Charts below (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook (the reader Is reminded that there are no Bodleian foliation numbers In the Notebook B photofacsimiles, because they were made from photographs taken in 1993 and because Dep. c. 534/1, which Included Notebook B, was not foliated by the Bodleian until January 1995). MWS would paginate her notebook as she went along, ordinarily at the top outside corner of the page. The uncanceled text on the first surviving leaf of Notebook B (pages 62/63, the "62" conjectural\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see transcription page 343 in this edition) follows directly from the text on the slip of paper (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18) that links Notebooks A and B. This first surviving page 62 may have in fact been the first page of the Draft in Notebook B, but the two missing leaves in the first Quire (see Quiring Charts below) allow for an alternate hypothesis that the original and now missing pages [58-61] actually started Notebook B. If that were the case, then the rewrite inserts "X" and "Y" (which begin with a page \i "57") \i0 would have been rewrites of what would have been the last page [57] used in Notebook A (a verso consistent with page 21, the last surviving verso of Notebook A's original sequence) together with the first pages [58-61] of Notebook B. Yet another hypothesis (but a less likely one because of the existence of the six light-blue leaves that were still available in Notebook A, possibly as late as April 1817, to be used for Inserts "X" and " Y") is that a substantial portion of the original and now missing pages [22-61] were actually drafted in Notebook B, in effect requiring that MWS used one or possibly two preliminary (now missing) quires of Notebook B for her Draft after the last surviving page 21 of Notebook A. Of course, all of these scenarios recreating the process of composition are premised on MWS having first written that "very long" Vol. II, Ch. [4] back In December 1816, then having shortened and revised that chapter, and then In the process having revised Ch [5] once more in the "X" and "Y" inserts (see transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition as well as the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 5 December 1816; see also "Second Insert Pages" and "Third Insert Slip" in the description of Notebook A above).}\par }