{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1464\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1464\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li60\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1094 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex88\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 clii\charscalex100\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-4\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri29\sb905\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ruling in Notebook B: MWS chose not to rule Notebook B with a penciled left margin, but she allowed a left margin on almost all of these 150 pages for her and PBS\super ?\nosupersub s later revisions.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri17\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Insert Pages in Notebook B: There is one insert slip of different paper at folio 38 (see pages 418-419 in this edition), and there is one rewrite/insert section of three leaves taken from elsewhere in Notebook B. Both of these insertions reflect MWS's response to PBS\super ?\nosupersub s suggestion that Victor rather than his father originate the idea of traveling to England in Draft Vol. II, Ch. 10 (see pages 416-441 in this edition). Each of these insertions demands further description.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li718\fi0\ri14\sb266\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 First Insert Slip (Dep, c. 534/1, folio 38): This first insert was written on a slip of paper that was cannibalized from the lower part of the address leaf of a letter from William Godwin to MWS, postmarked 9/[A]P/[l]817\super 21\nosupersub  (see pages 418-419 in this edition), providing a \i terminus ante quern non \i0 for MWS writing this insertion. This date actually dovetails nicely with the intensive period of correcting the draft that MWS recorded in her Marlow Journal for 10-17 April 1817 (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below for these dates). In addition to sets of pin holes revealing that this paper slip was pinned to the preceding folio 3 7, both folios 3 7 recto and 3 8 recto are marked by a large numeral "1" to indicate the sequence of the text (numerals "2," "3," "4," and " 5" concern the Second Insert described below). This slip is laid paper, of British origin, that measures 104-112 x 189 mm., yielding an estimated bifolium measurement of [?] x 378 mm. From the "felt" side of the paper, the watermark reads "GO[LDING I &] I SNE[LGROVE]" (see Beta-Radiographs, Fig. 9). The rest of the letter is not present in the Abinger file of Godwin's letters to the Shelleys at the Bodleian (Dep. c. 524), which does, however, have other examples of this "GOLDING & SNELGROVE" paper (e.g., letters to PBS of 12 May and of 4 July 1817, both with a watermark date of "1814") to allow the definite reconstruction of the missing letters in the watermark of the slip.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li718\fi0\ri22\sb72\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Second Insert Pages (Bep\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'bb\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  c. 534/l\sub 5\nosupersub  folios 41-43) This second insertion was written on three leaves (one still-joined bifolium [folios 41-42] and one singleton [folio 43]) that, with the same color and sewing holes as the paper in Notebook B, were almost certainly cannibalized from another and presumably later quire in this same notebook. Because MWS wrote this text according to PBS's recommendation on folio \i 39 \i0 verso and because she made the first of these revisions on the slip of paper evidently between 9 and 17 April 1817\super 22\nosupersub  (and marked "1"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see First Insert above), she made the revisions marked "2" through "5" on this Second Insert at the same period of time.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li718\fi365\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The pagination of these leaves is different from MWS's usual pattern in Notebook B: folio 41 recto was paginated "101" but at the top left (rather than the top right of a recto) and without the characteristic parenthesis-like line separating the number from the body of the text; folio 41 verso was paginated "102" at the top center in a way recalling or anticipating the pagination of the Fair Copy; and folios 42-43 were left unpaginated. For the ways these insert pages revise and repeat the text that MWS canceled in the original pages 1Q0-102,\super 23\nosupersub  see the explanation on transcription pages 417 and 429 in this edition. The large numerals 2-5 next to the canceled text signal the sequence of the replacement text in the insert pages. As I suggest on transcription page 417, it is possible that MWS. made different insertions on 5 or more insert slips of paper but then decided to cancel the entire text on original pages 100-102 and to rewrite the entire section in one place. She apparently began her rewrite after, rather than before, she carefully removed the bifolium and singleton from a later quire in the notebook, writing the new text on the removed leaves while she had the old text open before her.\super 24\nosupersub  This would help to explain, without reference to a central bifolium, the writing on folio 41 verso where the words run over to the still joined but otherwise blank folio 42 recto; it would also help to explain the nature of the wet offset ink blots that are described in the note on transcription page 435 in this edition. For more information on this entire set of revisions that MWS made in April 1817, consult all of pages 416-441 in this edition.}\par }