{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl663\margr1173\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn663\margrsxn1173\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7786\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9756 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xlv}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri46\sb638\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Fair-Copy Notebooks CI and C2}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1193\fi252\ri1152\sb185\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (Dep. c. 534/2, folios 1-18 and 19-29=Pages 646-719 and 720-771 in this edition) \expndtw-3 (With Dep. c. 534/2 insert folio 30 and substitute folio 31=Pages 772-777 in this edition)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Paper, Watermarks, Covers^ and Sewing Holes: Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2 survive in a total of 29 leaves of British laid paper, all of the same character and size, cream color (now yellowing), with edges that were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 223-225 x 176-191 mm. (the leaf width varying so much because of careless cutting after the drafting of the text into the notebooks), yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 223-225 x \i c. \i0 353-367 mm., and a minimum whole-sheet size of \i c. \i0 358-367 x 446-450 mm. It can be deduced that technically the leaves were made up into notebooks of quarto format, each consisting of a quire with 24 leaves (or 48 pages) that were sewn at three central stations (the absence of glue residue indicates that these quires were bound as single notebooks rather than bound together like Notebooks A and B).\super 25}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi350\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Each notebook has watermarks split across the reconstructed folds: from the "felt" side, the watermarks on the surviving eighteen leaves of CI read posthorn in a crowned shield over the monogrammed letters "P & S" (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 10-11); and the watermarks on the surviving eleven leaves of Notebook C2 read "PHIPPS & SON 11809\super ??\nosupersub  (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 12-13). The way that the "P & S" watermark in CI reflects the "PHIPPS & SON" watermark in C2 (together with the fact that the measurements of the leaves in CI and C2 are identical) means that the two notebooks were made from the same paper, presumably originally supplied by a mill in large whole sheets that contained both watermarks. There are no other recognizable examples of this paper in the Bodleian Shelley collections.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi358\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 In all likelihood, MWS used a total of [Peleven] notebooks for transcribing her Draft into a Fair Copy (for this estimate, see "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of \i Frankenstein" \i0 below). The two partially extant Notebooks CI and C2 and the [?nine] now missing notebooks were quite probably matching single-quire, soft-cover notebooks (or exercise books) that were available from many British stationers at this time.\super 26 \nosupersub Notebooks CI and C2 give ample evidence that MWS (and PBS) fair copied the novel while the leaves were still conjoint in the sewn notebooks, for it is clear that the writing on many leaves was torn or cut through when the notebooks were disassembled. The leaves seem to have been removed from the notebooks by different methods: in CI they were extracted with three hacking cuts, from the top edge to the first sewing hole, from there to the third sewing hole, and from there to the bottom edge; in C2 the outer leaves (folios 19, 20, 24-29) were severed down the second halves of the bifolia (leaving in the first halves a large stub at the bottom of the gutter and in the second halves a vertical wedge-shaped strip missing at the top) whereas the inner leaves (folios 21-22, 23) were torn out rather than cut\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see the photofacsimiles of Fair-Copy Notebooks CI and C2.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi353\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 All of these notebooks would have made a reasonably tidy set to circulate to other publishers until Lackington accepted the novel in August/September 1817, after which time the notebooks would have been disbound and used as printer's copy. With the exception of pages 175-18 7 thatPBS transcribed into Notebook C2 (pages that MWS later re-transcribed, apparently before 3 August 1817), the extant pages of the Fair Copy give evidence (ink fingerprints, compositor's initials and notations,\super 27\nosupersub  and folds in the paper) of having been used by the compositors to set the type for the novel. See \i\super u\nosupersub  Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 3 August 1817 as well as the footnotes on pages 647-777 in this edition for additional information on the disposition of these Notebooks; see "Substitute Pages" below for additional information on MWS's re-transcription of the PBS Fair Copy.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi355\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There are additional sewing holes (three, four, or five) in the corners of the extant Fair-Copy leaves that were almost certainly made after the notebooks were disbound. Although it is impossible to determine if the leaves were tagged together with thread before, while, or after they were at the printer, this rough sewing most likely was done in order to secure them together after the printing was finished. (One small piece of white thread is still in one of the sewing holes in the last leaf of the Fair Copy, the only surviving leaf of MWS's}\par }