{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1469\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1469\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li65\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1099 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 dvi\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri22\sb638\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 re-transcrlptlon of PBS's Fair Copy.) Most of these leaves (with the exception of PBS\super ?\nosupersub s Fair Copy, which did not go to the printer) also evidence folds that seem to result from their having been posted to or from the printer, and three of the leaves (folios 20 and 23 [pages 143/144 and 167/168]-\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 as well as folio 31 [the substitute re-transcrlption leaf taken from another notebook] have pleats from the paper having been crumpled and reflattened, possibly while the leaves were In the composing room of the printer).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi353\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There Is one curious characteristic about the pages from the Fair-Copy Notebooks, namely that MWS followed an exact pattern by writing more lines on one side of each leaf. The extant leaves of Notebooks CI and C2 show that in the first half of the notebook (up to and including the first leaf of the central bifolium) MWS wrote 14 lines on every recto and 19 lines on every verso; she then would reverse the pattern In the second half of the notebook, that Is, from the second leaf of the central bifolium to the end of the notebook. (For more specifics, see the footnote on transcription page 649 In this edition: and note that PBS did not follow MWS\super ?\nosupersub s exact pattern when he undertook the fair copying near the end of Notebook C2; also note that MWS apparently abandoned that pattern when she re-transcribed PBS's Fair Copy because the notebook pages used for the re-transcriptlon had an equal number of commercially ruled lines on each page.) What caused or enabled MWS to follow such an exact and exacting pattern is not known: it is possible that she used some form of template, but the intersections of a 14-line and a 19-line page on opposite sides of one leaf do not seem to prevent or diminish any kind of aggravating bleed-through or show-through that might make for difficult reading. Because the surviving substitute leaf still has faint traces of commercial ruling and because that leaf came from a notebook that might have been similar to Notebooks CI and C2, then it is quite possible that all of these pages in Notebooks CI and C2 had faint commercial ruling that has totally disappeared since MWS copied her novel. That kind of ruling would help explain the change of pattern at the central bifolium, but that still does not explain why there was an apparently random choice of 14 lines on one side of each bifolium and 19 lines on the other. PBS's not following the pattern does not prove anything one way or the other: he might have ignored faint commercial ruled lines in hopes of getting all of the rest of the Draft into this last Fair-Copy Notebook.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dating of Fair-Copy Notebooks CI andC2: (18 April-[?13] May 1817): See \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for these dates, for the first of which (18 April) MWS entered "Transcribe" in her journal and for the last of which (a cumulative entry for 10-13 May) she entered "Finish transcribing." In this same Journal on 14 May, MWS entered that PBS "corrects F." and that she did "write Preface\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Finis"; by 26 May, Byron's publisher John Murray had read some or all of the [Peleven] Fair-Copy Notebooks (see MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,168-169 and 171).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri7\sb250\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Foliation and Pagination in Notebooks CI and C2: The Quiring Charts below (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook. Ink and other evidence suggest that MWS paginated the notebooks as she went along, possibly a few pages at a time. Page numbers are centered at the top of each page. It also appears that MWS paginated the last thirteen pages of the Fair Copy, the pages on which PBS transcribed the Draft into Notebook C2, all at one time, apparently after PBS made his transcription.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi355\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The Quiring Charts indicate that Notebook CI began on page 91. If the preceding but now missing notebooks were identical to CI and C2 (each having 48 pages), then the Fair Copy of Volume UPof the novel would have occupied most and possibly all of a total of four notebooks: the missing 90 pages would have occupied 45 of the 48 leaves available in the two notebooks preceding CI and C2; and \i 97 \i0 pages (pages 91-187) would have occupied Notebooks CI and C2 (supplemented by one Insert Page, for which see below). "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" below suggests that MWS may not have used a new notebook to begin Volume III (or, for that matter. Volume II) of the Fair Copy\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 if that were the case and if the preceding notebooks had 24 leaves each, then MWS would have begun page 1 of Volume III of the Fair Copy on folio 4 recto of the now missing 24-page notebook, the first three leaves of which would have been used for the final five or six pages of the Fair Copy of Volume II. One variation to these numbers would result If one or both of these notebooks were 26-leaf (or 52-page) notebooks, a possibility suggested by some of the numbers that MWS and PBS entered on the Draft of the novel.}\par }