{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl661\margr1170\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn661\margrsxn1170\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7673\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9641 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xlvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri24\sb617\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Insert and Substitute Pages in Notebook C2: The final two leaves (folios 30 and 31) associated with Notebook C2, each of which is on paper similar to but not identical with the paper of C2, have text from the concluding section of Volume III of the novel and were written after MWS and PBS had apparently run out of the notebooks that were being used for the last sections of the Fair Copy.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li722\fi0\ri17\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Insert Page (Dep* c. 534/2\sub 5\nosupersub  folio 30): This one-page insertion was written on one leaf of British laid paper, cream (now yellowing), with outer edges commercially cut and the inside (left-hand) edge jaggedly hacked just beyond the original fold (see photofacsimile on page 772 in this edition). The leaf measures 220-222 x 184-188 mm. (fold at 180-181 mm.), yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 220-222 x 360-362 mm., and a minimum whole-sheet size of 360-362 x 440-444 mm. Technically, the leaf was made up into a notebook of quarto format, with the remaining half of the watermark running sideways at the fold. From the "felt" side, the watermark reads "1814," below almost entirely cut-away capital letters, the first letter possibly a "W" from [?"W TURNER & SON"]. There are no other recognizable examples of this paper in the Bodleian Shelley collections. Sewing holes at the fold prove that this leaf originally belonged to a commercially-supplied notebook that was slightly smaller than Notebook C2 but possibly quite similar to it in appearance. However, the possible evidence of sewing-tapes at three stations and of kettle stitches suggest that this notebook may have been a thicker volume with multiple quires.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li727\fi314\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 This insert leaf with PBS text (but paginated " 18 7" by MWS\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 apparently after PBS had transcribed the text) was made necessary because PBS had run out of room in the 48-page Fair-Copy Notebook C2 and needed one more page to conclude the transcription of the novel. After PBS transcribed the text on to this insert leaf, it was immediately inserted into Notebook C2, as is evidenced by the wet offset ink blots from it on to the facing folio 29 verso, the last leaf of Notebook C2.\super 28\nosupersub  For more explanation on the positioning of this insert leaf, see the footnotes to transcription page 771 in this edition.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li730\fi0\ri7\sb67\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Substitute Pages (Dep. c. 534/2\sub 5\nosupersub  folio 31): This two-page substitute was written on one leaf of British laid paper, cream (now yellowing), with outer edges commercially cut and the inside (left-hand) edge neatly torn and with very faint traces of horizontal commercial ruling in lines \i c. \i0 12 mm. apart. The leaf measures 225-227 x 181-183 mm., yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 225-227 x 362-366 mm., and a minimum whole-sheet size of 3 62-3 66 x 450-454 mm. Technically, the leaf was made up into a notebook of quarto format, with the remaining half of the watermark set sideways at the torn edge. From the "felt" side, the watermark is a posthorn in a crowned shield (top half only).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li727\fi312\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 This one leaf appears to have come from a commercially-supplied notebook (very similar to but slightly taller than Notebooks CI and C2) that was almost identical to another notebook from which MWS used twelve leaves on 13 July 1817 for writing down PBS\super ?\nosupersub s dictated translation of Aeschylus's \i Prometheus Bound, \i0 lines 1-314 (Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. c. 5, folios 73-84, text identified as PBS's in Barker-Benfield, \i Guitar, \i0 pages 88-89). The almost identical source\super 29\nosupersub  suggests that MWS may have written her substitute text in the summer of 1817, a conjecture supported by other evidence (see "\i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 13 July and for 3 August 1817). The traces of regular sewing holes in both the one-leaf and the twelve-leaf samples indicate that both samples were torn from single-section notebooks of probably 24 leaves each, much like Notebooks CI and C2. On the \i Frankenstein \i0 leaf there is also a cluster of later, irregular sewing holes (through one of which is a fragment of white thread) at the inner top corner. These holes, only roughly similar to the irregular sewing holes in other C2 leaves, were probably made when this single leaf was stitched to other now missing substitute pages. See "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" (as well as the footnotes on transcription page 777 in this edition) for evidence that MWS actually used eight leaves (fifteen pages) for her re-transcription of PBS's Fair Copy.}\par }