{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1467\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1467\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1094 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ix\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri31\sb653\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 369,383, and 605 (this last one dating from late March or early April 1817)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 in each of these cases, after MWS began correcting her Draft a few days later in April, the original "Maimouna" was changed directly to "Safie," MWS having already tried and then rejected the intermediating "Amina" when she wrote the "X" and "Y" inserts.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi358\ri17\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There are additional name changes in the Draft (including adding letters to finish an initial capital) in \i Frankenstein \i0 that show MWS's artistry at work (the parenthetical page numbers refer the reader to transcription pages in this edition): the professor "M.K" became "M. Krempe" (page \i 55); \i0 the professor "M.W." first became "Mr. Waldham" and then "M. Waldman" (page 57 and note); "Justine Martin" became "Justine Moritz" (pages 127 and 133 and notes); the child "Louisa M [or ?B]" became "Louisa [?Caln (or ?Valn)]" became "Louisa Biron" (page 133); the pretty "Miss Mansfeld" became "Miss Mansfield" in \i 1818 \i0 without any evidence for the change in the Draft (pages 133 and 135); the rich banker "M. Hofland" became "M. Duvillard" in \i 1818 \i0 without any evidence for the change in the Draft (page 135); Victor's mother "Caroline Beaumont" became "Caroline Beaufort" in \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  \i0 without any evidence for the change in the Draft (page 177). "Biron" of course echoes Byron, and "Duvillard" was the surname of MWS's Swiss maid Elise. All of the names in the novel, of course, have antecedents, and the name "Frankenstein" is no exception. Most often, it is linked byway of science and "lightning" to Benjamin Franklin, but Florescu (pages 58 ff.) has traced the name to the Castle Frankenstein in Germany that MWS and PBS and Claire Clairmont may have visited during their six weeks' tour in 1814. This edition may make it possible for new research on all of the names in \i Frankenstein.\super 37}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li984\fi0\ri0\sb242\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 Hypothetic ally Reconstructing an Ur-Text of \i0 Frankenstein}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb190\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 It is dangerous to speculate about the ur-text of \i Frankenstein, \i0 for it could have been very short and inconsequential; and it is possible, therefore, that everything mediating between such an ur-text and the Draft was nothing more than now discarded rough drafts of pages and sections that never had any integrity or identity as a separate text. However, there are clues in the Draft that MWS may have been copying from and expanding upon what she called her "story"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 an ur-text of some length that she had written in the summer of 1816. The remarks on the names above suggest that Frankenstein spent his childhood with Myrtella and Carignan in that ur-text, and that maybe his mother's maiden name was Beaumont. However, it should be stressed that every changed name does not an ur-text character make. Other evidence suggests, e.g., that the very long chapter about "Maimouna" (who then became "Amina" and then "Safie") was not drafted or even conceived until late November or early December 1816.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi720\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 It is easier to speculate about what was not in the ur-text than to prove what was there. One way for MWS to enlarge her "story" into a "book" or novel was to add new characters and incidents to the outside and to the inside of her frame tale. That is, it is likely that neither the Captain (Walton from the outside narrative frame) nor the Arabian (Safie from the innermost tale) was in the original ur-text\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and there is no persuasive manuscript evidence to suggest that they were.\super 38\nosupersub  Whether the other parts of the De Lacey episode were contained in the ur-text, with a possibly different mechanism for the monster learning to speak and read, I cannot determine. Everything else, however, may have been sketched out in one form or another in the summer of 1816. MWS tells us that the tale began with the line "It was on a dreary night of November." Reasoning from that fact, we can speculate that the ur-text had three distinct parts (although it is impossible to determine just how long each one was): the creation scene; the scenes before the creation; the scenes after the creation. Evidence for each of these parts in the ur-text comes from the following sources: (1) MWS's statements in her Journals, her letters, and her \i 1831 \i0 Introduction; (2) mistakes in transcription that are best explained as copying rather than drafting errors; (3) a Draft page or chapter that underwent only minimal cancelation and revision when it was initially drafted into the Notebook (suggesting that it was an intermediate Draft that had been copied from an earlier version); (4) a Draft page or chapter with relatively full and/or precise pointing, suggesting that MWS and/or PBS had worked through the punctuation in an earlier complete draft; and, finally, (5) references in a part of the ur-text (hypothetically reconstructed by means of the evidence}\par }