{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl500\margr1339\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn500\margrsxn1339\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7843\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9821 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixi}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri26\sb624\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 listed above) suggesting that other characters and incidents were elsewhere in the ur-text. With these evidences in mind, I offer the following observations about the ur-text, again reminding the reader that some of the evidence of an earlier state may merely mean there were intervening rough drafts rather than an ur-text.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The Creation Chapter: The creation chapter (Draft: Vol. I, Ch. \scaps 7a) \scaps0 is the one for which there is the strongest likelihood of its having existed in the ur-text. MWS indicated in her 1831 Introduction that she began her original tale on [?17] June (the morning after her dream) with the words "It was on a dreary night of November" (see transcription page 97 in this edition). These words may have begun the ur-text itself or, over the summer, they may have been preceded by introductory sections or chapters leading up to the creation scene. That the ur-text contained a description of that "dreary night" and its immediate aftermath is suggested by the relatively "clean" Draft: Ch. \scaps 7a, \scaps0 which has few MWS interlineations and cancelations made in the process of drafting (the additional interlinear and marginal alterations were a consequence of PBS's hand in the manuscript at a later time).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri10\sb250\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Chapters (or Characters and Incidents) before the Creation: If "It was on a dreary night of November" were preceded in the ur-text by other sections and if Ch. \scaps 7a \scaps0 was mainly a transcription of the creation scene and its immediate aftermath, then the other references in Ch. \scaps 7a \scaps0 to Ingolstadt, to the Swiss diligence, to Clerval, to Elizabeth, and to Victor's father, brother, and dead mother suggest that the ur-text would have also depicted Victor's adolescence in Geneva and his later experiences with Professors "K" and "W" in Ingolstadt. The relatively "clean" and accurately pointed pre-creation chapters (Draft: Vol. I, Chs. [l]-6) also argue for this ur-text about the young Victor and Myrtella and Carignan in Geneva. Two not-so-clean aspects of these early chapters are worthy of note here: the rough draft (folios 1-3) that MWS added to Notebook A in late October/ early November 1816 offers further evidence that the originally drafted and "cleaner" Chapters were based on an ur-text; and any reconstruction of the drafting process must mentally eliminate the frequent and later interventions by PBS in the Draft. The existence of the relatively "clean" Chs. [l]-6, however, does not necessarily mean that they were mere copies of fully articulated chapters in the ur-text. That is, it is unlikely that an ur-text behind all of Draft Chs. \scaps [1]-7a \scaps0 (what originally occupied MWS pages [?34]-84) consisted of 50 pages; more likely it was no more than half that length, which would still have made it possible for MWS to expand her ur-text into her Draft without much cancelation and revision as she went along. Determining which of the pages or incidents or characters were expanded may prove impossible, but future speculation should be based on such concrete evidence as name changes and transcription mistakes.\super 39}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri5\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Chapters (or Characters and Incidents) after the Creation: If the ur-text contained most of the creation chapter (Ch. \scaps 7a) \scaps0 and some of the preceding chapters (Chs. [l]-6), it is likely that the ur-text also dealt with the consequences of the creation. If we use the same standard of a "clean" text for Draft: Vol. I, Chs. 7B-12,then the incidents of William's murder and Justine's imprisonment and death were part of the ur-text, a possibility supported by apparent copying errors in the Draft (see especially the mistranscription of the name "Myrtella" in the Justine section on pages 180-181 in this edition; see also pages 156-157, lines 31 and 36). The next Chs. 13-14 have relatively more copying errors\super 40\nosupersub  and suggest that MWS was drafting new material at the same time that she was copying some things from earlier incarnations, possibly from the ur-text. An index of the kind of copying from an earlier text is to be found at the end of Vol. I in Notebook A (see note on transcription page 253 in this edition). MWS had finished drafting Ch. 14 (the last chapter of Vol. I) on three leaves that she paginated 153-157; for some reason she tore pages 153-156 (2 leaves) from the notebook, canceled the concluding paragraph she had just written on page 157 (which she then renumbered " 153 "), and then drafted a second and longer conclusion to this last chapter of Vol. I on pages 153-160. Although the shorter version originally written on pages 153-156 is missing, the extant pages 153-160 reveal what rewritten and expanded pages would look like when they are based on what was apparently a fairly good draft.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi360\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 If, as is likely, parts of Chs. 13 and 14 (which record Victor's excursion to Chamounix) were in the ur-text, then MWS probably wrote it while she was still in Switzerland, possibly when she was at Chamounix}\par }