{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1469\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1476\margrsxn6530\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw720\colsr362\colno2\colw2820 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb10\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ixii}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1469\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri26\sb634\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 21-27 July and for 24 July 1816). If that were the case, then in late July and early August she may have written the first portions of the monster's narrative, the Draft of which dramatically opens Vol. II, where Chs. 1-3 have the same "clean" and well-pointed text by which an ur-text could be inferred. If that were the case, then the ur-text had at least introduced the De Laceys into the monster's life. After that, inferences get much murkier, because what appear to have been original pages 22-61 of Vol. II (which linked Notebooks A and B) are not extant. That there was no ur-text for much of these now missing pages is suggested by three circumstances: the missing pages suggest a trauma in the newly conceived text that required considerable drafting and redrafting; the missing pages were the first to introduce the story of Safie (initially named "Maimouna"), the innermost character whom MWS apparently created to expand her "story" into a "book"; and it appears that MWS was excited enough by writing this new section about the Arabian to announce to PBS on 5 December 1816 that she had "finished the 4 Chap, of Frankenstein which is a very long one & I think you would like it" (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for that date). By hoping that PBS "would like it," MWS is telling us that the Safie episode (and therefore the chapters in which the monster learned to read) were not in the ur-text. That all of this text was relatively new is also suggested by the rewrite Inserts "X" and "Y" (see pages 314-341 in this edition). In short, the missing forty pages and the rewrite sections are probably typical antecedents to the kind of "clean" Draft that makes up most of Notebook A.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi353\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Notebook B is a very different matter, and the very fact that it does not have a vertical pencil rule creating a left margin may tell us something about how MWS saw the remainder of her task: that she was not working from an ur-text in the same way she had been in most of Notebook A. The evidence for such a distinction is circumstantial, but there is a clear difference between the two manuscript versions of MWS's 1819 novella "Mathilda": her revised and later draft of "Mathilda," which resembles something between a final Draft and a Fair Copy, has a distinct pencil ruled margin similar to Notebook A of \i Frankenstein, \i0 whereas the earlier and rougher Draft that MWS entitled "Fields of Fancy" was drafted on pages that much more resemble Notebook B of \i Frankenstein, \i0 having a margin with no rule and a text in a greater state of revision and flux.\super 41\nosupersub  It is possible that this distinction between an unruled and a ruled set of pages might have enabled MWS to keep her drafts in order as she transcribed one from another.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi358\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 How much of Notebook B was in the ur-text is difficult to conjecture: the sometimes "clean" text might mean that the monster's confrontation with the De Laceys (minus Safie) might have been sketched out in the summer of 1816\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 as most likely was the monster's murder of William \expndtw15 (if\expndtw0  it is inferred that Justine's trial was part of the ur-text). Proceeding further down this road would transform the ur-text into a mini-novel of some length, with only the Captain on the outside and the Arabian on the inside missing from what MWS had drafted in Geneva\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 that is to say, the ur-text may also have contained a skeletal form of the chapters in England and Scotland where Victor began making a mate for the monster (Draft: Vol. II, Chs. 11-15\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 452-543 in this edition) as well as of the chapters back in Geneva and Evian where the monster murdered Elizabeth on her wedding night (Chs. 16-17\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 544-582).\super 41\nosupersub  If these chapters were in the ur-text, the "busier" look to Notebook B (and, in many places, its more inexact pointing) suggests that MWS was doing much more than copying from or embellishing a well-developed ur-text at this point. Finally, arguing from the likelihood that the beginning of the Walton frame was never in the ur-text, we can conclude that most or all of the last scenes in the Arctic were not there as well. So after all this conjecturing, we end where we began, with the suspicion that neither Walton nor Safie were part of the ur-text, a text that may have contained in a shorter form much of the novel as it is represented by Notebooks A and B.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li838\fi0\ri0\sb252\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of \i0 Frankenstein}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri0\sb190\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 It is possible to deduce that MWS used eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks when she (and PBS) transcribed the Draft into a Fair Copy that would become printer's copy. The easiest way to argue that point is to note how close the pagination of the extant Fair-Copy Notebooks CI and C2 was to the pagination in the \i 1818 \i0 edition: see the headers on transcription page 647 (Fair Copy: Vol HI, Ch. \b [V], \b0\ul page 99\ul0  = 1818: Vol, HI, Ch. V, \ul pages \b 100-\b0 101\ul0 ) and page 749 (Fair Copy: Vol. m, Ch. VH, \ul page 175\ul0  = 1818: Vol HI, Ch. VII, pages \ul 176-178\ul0 ). Because MWS took painstaking care in transcribing her text into Notebooks CI and C2, we may surmise that the same}\par }