{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl515\margr1312\margt1422\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn515\margrsxn1312\margtsxn1422\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7723\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9703 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\expndtw-2\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixiii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri24\sb614\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 care and precision were employed in earlier notebooks and that she fair copied her Draft in the same way, with a new pagination sequence for each volume and with a relatively rigid number of words and lines per page, per leaf, and per notebook. If, then, the page numbers of the Fair-Copy Notebooks (even allowing for the blank spaces at the ends and beginnings of chapters, a characteristic of the notebooks as well as of \i 1818) \i0 were always close to the page numbers in \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 (which had 181 pages in Vol. 1,156 pages in Vol. II, and 192 pages in Vol. Ill), then there would have been approximately 529 pages (181 + 156 + 192) in the Fair Copy. If the other notebooks were identical or similar to CI and C2 (each of which had 48 pages), then the total of eleven notebooks would have proved just right: 11 x 48 = 528. It almost seems too perfect that the one extra page in \i 1818 \i0 meant that PBS had to find one extra page (folio 30 in Dep. c. 534/2) in order to write the last page of the Fair Copy. Such a calculation is, of course, too perfect, because we know that MWS and/or PBS made additions to the proofs (that is, there was text added in \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  \i0 that was not in the Fair Copy). And, of course, MWS and/or PBS may have totally eliminated (rather than replaced) text in the proofs that had been in the Fair Copy. But neither of these actions cast much doubt on the approximation here, that eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks would have been sufficient to contain the text that produced \i 1818. \i0 In fact, there is evidence that some of these notebooks had 52 rather than 48 pages\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 in each of those cases, a notebook consisted of thirteen folded sheets that made up 26 leaves or 52 pages.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi360\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Further proof that the pagination in both Fair Copy and \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  \i0 were nearly identical is revealed by the marginal numbers that MWS and PBS entered on the Draft pages in April/May 1817 when they were recording and estimating the proportions of the three-volume Fair Copy that they were creating out of a two-volume Draft. The meaning of all these numbers (see transcription pages 107,109,121,151,221,251, 343, and 393) eluded me until I recognized that the Fair-Copy pagination approximated the \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 pagination, enabling me to offer the following gloss for these otherwise inexplicable numbers.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi374\ri14\sb70\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "52": This PBS number on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. \scaps 7a, \scaps0 page 80, apparently records the "52" leaves or "104" pages that had been used to fair copy the Draft up to this point\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 a glance at transcription page 107 reveals that the \i 1818 \i0 equivalent is page "105." It is possible that the "52" meant that the Fair Copy up to this point had used two complete notebooks of 24 leaves each, plus an additional four leaves in a third notebook, but there is no end of chapter or like stopping point in the Draft to warrant the notation. It is more likely that "52" designated two complete notebooks of 26 leaves each. As will be the case for the numbers discussed below, a deduction based on number of words rather than pages would support the same conclusion: the number of \i 1818 \i0 words up to this point and the estimated number of Draft words (estimated because half of the pages up to this point are missing) would occupy approximately two 24- or 26-page notebooks (or \super 2\nosupersub /\sub n\nosupersub  of the novel) at MWS's average of 285 words per leaf evidenced by extant Notebooks CI and C2 (the estimate has to be for a leaf because MWS wrote more lines on one side than the other\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see "The Makeup of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks" above as well as transcription page 649 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi372\ri0\sb70\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "52" together with calculation up to a canceled "156" and an emphasized "180": These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. \scaps 7a, \scaps0 page 81, appear to calculate the number of pages that were used to transcribe all of Fair Copy: Vol. I, which amounted to 181 pages in \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 (see transcription page 221 in this edition), a number suggesting that Fair Copy: Vol. I also had approximately 181 pages). If Fair Copy: Vol. I occupied 180 pages, then it would have filled approximately three and one-half Fair-Copy Notebooks: in PBS's calculations, one number "52" denoted 52 leaves that generated "104" pages (that is, two 26-leaf notebooks); another "52" appears to denote "52" pages (one 26-leaf notebook); the number "24" appears to denote 24 pages (that is, half of a 24-leaf notebook or almost half of a 26-leaf notebook); and the sum "180" denoted the estimated or actual total of 180 Fair-Copy pages used for Vol. I.\super 43\nosupersub These calculations were very important to the Shelleys, who were attempting (in April/May 1817) to divide the two-volume Draft into a three-volume Fair Copy, a process that demanded accurate estimates of the number of pages per volume. Moreover, the evidence of Notebooks CI and C2 suggest that MWS was preparing very fine fair copies to impress a publisher\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and that (as a daughter of a publisher) she might have been writing to rule, transcribing in such a way (with faintly ruled lines or with a template) that she knew approximately how many words she was getting to each page, to each notebook, and to each volume (Godwin may have been equally aware of such matters when he entered page numbers of his drafts into his Diary).}\par }