{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1476\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1476\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1090 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ixiv\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-4\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi353\ri24\sb648\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "Ch V- 113": This MWS number on Draft: Vol. I., Ch. \scaps 7b, \scaps0 page 87, was not written in the Autumn of 1817 and did not refer to the fact that \i 1818: \i0 Vol. I, Ch. V, began on page 114 (with the implication that there was a change from proof to revise, or that MWS got the number wrong by one); rather, because the Fair-Copy pages approximated the \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  \i0 pages/this number reveals MWS recording in April/May 1817 that she was beginning this Fair Copy: Vol. I, Ch. V on page 113\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 that is, 113/180ths through Vol. I. (With a little more maths, it would be possible to estimate just what day between 18 April and 13 May that MWS made this entry.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi370\ri26\sb60\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "20" and "15": These [?MWS] numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 8, page 102, seem to be echoed by the PBS numbers of "20" + "37" = "57\super 5?\nosupersub  on page 137 (for which, see below), but I am not certain what they mean. Although they may refer to the number of pages MWS had just transcribed, they more likely suggest that it took approximately twenty pages of Fair Copy to transcribe fifteen pages of Draft. That 75 % relationship may have been become clear to the Shelleys as they continued to transcribe. Although the Fair-Copy pages are not extant at this point to offer exact percentages, there is a \i 76% \i0 relationship between the estimated 180 Fair-Copy pages for Vol. I and the 143 pages of Draft up to that point \expndtw15 (if\expndtw0  we, as the Shelleys might have done, forget about the 6 insert pages at the beginning of the extant Notebook A).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi370\ri31\sb72\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "20" + "37" = "57": These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 12, page 137, seem to echo the "20" + "15" on page 102 (for which, see above). It is possible that "57" may have something to do with the 57 pages between page 80 (where PBS first entered a number) and this page 137\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 or with the 58 pages between page 102 (where MWS last entered numbers) and page 160 (where Vol. I. ends).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi355\ri26\sb70\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "100" and "130" with calculations to a sum of "205": These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 152, seem to indicate that MWS had used "205" Fair-Copy pages, an amount that approximates the \i 1818 \i0 pages used to this point: 181 pages (in Vol. I) + 21 pages (in Vol. II) = 202 pages. This number also suggests that MWS had just finished the 4th Fair-Copy Notebook (three notebooks of 26 leaves each [=156 pages] plus one notebook of 26 or 24 leaves [=52 or 48 pages] would equal 208 or 204 pages).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi374\ri19\sb72\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "169" and "191" and the sums leading up to these numbers: These two sums on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62 (the first extant page of Notebook B), seem to be estimates of the number of pages that will be occupied by Fair Copy: Vol. II and Fair Copy: Vol. III. MWS started her sums leading up to "169" with the number "98" and ended it with "97"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 one of these numbers suggests the now missing Fair Copy: Vol. II, Ch. [VI], page \i 97 \i0 or page 98 (a number in tandem with \i 1818: \i0 Vol. II, Ch. VII, page 98, where Ch. VII begins (see transcription page 343, which is the first extant page of Notebook B). The sum of "169" either records or predicts the total number of pages in Draft: Vol. II (in that \i 1818: \i0 Vol. II had a total of 156 pages).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi358\ri12\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 PBS seems to have used a similar form of calculation to reach his sum of " 191," a number that most likely records or estimates the 191 pages in Fair Copy: Vol. Ill (in that \i 1818: \i0 Vol. Ill had 192 pages). The fact that these important numbers are on the first extant page of Notebook B suggests that this page 62 was in fact the first page of Notebook B, at least in April/May when the Shelleys transcribed the Draft into a Fair Copy (and when they were doing these calculations). This conclusion supports my hypothesis elsewhere that the missing pages that at one time joined Notebooks A and B were probably from Notebook A.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi365\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "310": This PBS number (which could possibly be "320") on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 8, page 87, is most likely a record of just how many pages had been used in the Fair Copy up to this point, a number confirmed by the number of equivalent \i 1818 \i0 pages: 181 (in Vol. I) + 136 (up to this point in Vol. II) = 317. This number may also tell us that the Shelleys had just finished their 6th Fair-Copy Notebook: we already suspect the first two notebooks used 52 pages each, and the third notebook may have had 52 pages, yielding 156 pages in all\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 if the next three Notebooks had the same number of pages, the six notebooks would have had a usable total of 312 pages, 310 of which were used to transcribe the Draft up to this point. Even if the number were "320" rather than "310" and the transcription had continued into the next notebook for a few pages, the estimated 529 pages of Fair Copy (based on the total number of \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  \i0 pages) minus 310 pages (or 320) already used, meant that there would be 219 (or 209) pages yet to transcribe, an amount that could have been accommodated in the five remaining notebooks (#\super ?\nosupersub s 7-11), even if all of them were 48-page notebooks: 5 notebooks x 48 pages = 240 pages.}\par }