{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl569\margr1264\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn569\margrsxn1264\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7807\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9785 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixv}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi353\ri12\sb612\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 A \i0 final word on PBS's involvement in the Fair Copy: because he recorded most of the numbers discussed above and made most of the calculations, it may look like he was involved in transcribing the Draft into the Fair Copy at these points. However, all other evidence suggests the contrary: PBS would not have wanted his hand to be in a Fair Copy that was to be kept anonymous; and the kinds of embellishments that PBS introduced into MWS's text when he did fair copy the Draft at the end of Notebook C2 (see Appendix A in order to contrast MWS following the Draft and PBS embellishing the Draft) are not present in the \i 1818 \i0 text around the places where PBS made the computations. Consequently, it is more likely that the PBS numbers are there because MWS asked him to make the computations for her as she fair copied her Draft in April/May 1817.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li869\fi0\ri0\sb230\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 Other Numbers and the Dates in The \i0 Frankenstein \i Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri12\sb192\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The computations that MWS and PBS performed in the margins of the Notebooks A and B indicate what numbers can do (and reveal), and in various places in this edition I have made computations to remark on the blank "spaces" caused by missing pages in the Draft and the Fair Copy. See, e.g., the notes on transcription pages 2, 6, and 9 for computations that gloss pages 1-40 missing from Draft Notebook A; see also the note on transcription page 777 for computed words per leaf indicating that the two extant re-transcription pages 185/MWS-l 86/MWS were actually part of fifteen MWS re-transcription pages (all of which would have been sent to the printer). Other numbers (e.g., the very exact transcribing pattern of 19 lines on one side of a Fair-Copy leaf and 14 lines on the other, yielding an average of 285 words per leaf\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see transcription page 649), together with other evidence, lead to the conclusion that there were eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks. And the average of 285 words on each Fair-Copy leaf permitted accurate estimates of what was written on now missing pages from Fair-Copy Notebooks CI and C2 (see transcription pages 651, 731, 740-741, and 747). In short, much of what is missing from The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks can be reconstructed from available evidence.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi358\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 In other places, MWS used a different form of pagination (citing earlier pagination) to leave herself a trail through the convoluted Insert sections "X" and "Y" (seepages 314-341). She also left a trail of numbers "1" through "5" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, pages 416-441, revealing the sequence of revisions that she made to her Draft between 10 and 17 April 1817. Finally, the accident of MWS writing on a slip of paper on the verso of which was a reconstructible postmark of 9 April 1817 shed a great deal of light on the makeup of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks.\super 44}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi353\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The specific and important date of 9 April 1817 calls to mind an important moment in the text of \i Frankenstein, \i0 when Victor related his story to the magistrate "briefly, but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy" (see transcription page 577 in this edition). As is so often the case, what happens inside the text reflects what happens outside or with the text; that is, MWS herself in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks marked the dates with precision, and the alterations she made in the dates (together with other clues) reveal that she was very concerned with the chronology in her novel. Even though Walton's letters are dated with the decade of the eighteenth century missing, MWS has given enough information for us to determine three important points about the chronology: that the novel begins with Walton's letter dated 11 December 17[96] (which is, or is very close to, the day on which MWS imagined she was conceived);\super 45\nosupersub  that Walton's tale takes the gestation period of 276 days in the telling; and that the novel ends with Walton's last letter of 12 September 17[97], thirteen days after MWS was born and two days after her mother died. The clues to this reading of the chronology have long been available in the printed texts of \i 1818 \i0 and \i 1831\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 what the Notebooks supply is graphic evidence that MWS, like Victor, was carefully "marking the dates with accuracy."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi355\ri0\sb5\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 A perpetual calendar gives more than enough evidence to establish a chronology for all the plots in \i Frankenstein \i0 (although there is one major inconsistency). Walton leaves a clue in the outside frame when he remarks that he first saw the monster on "Monday (July 31st)" in the year "17\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 " (see Walton's Letter IV on transcription page 5); among the years in the eighteenth century when 31 July fell on a Monday is 1797, a year that is confirmed by a number of facts, one of which (as Mellor has remarked) is that the monster read}\par }