{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1461\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1461\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1099 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ixvi\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb626\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 a copy of Volney's \i Ruins of Empire, \i0 which was not published until 1791, thereby eliminating all other possible years in the 1700s when 31 July fell on a Monday. MWS left a second clue in one of Elizabeth's letters to Victor in which it was announced that Victor's brother William had been murdered by the monster on "Thursday (May 7th)," the reading in \i 1818. A \i0 glance at pages 154-155 in this edition will show that MWS approached this date with considerable care: she first wrote "May 26" (which would have been the year 1796) and then immediately canceled "26" and replaced it with "28^", thereby indicating that she wished to get the year right (there would be little reason else for the two-day change). Eventually, in the missing Fair Copy or in proofs, the date was changed to "May 7th", a date still consistent (exactly three weeks earlier) with the year that MWS had in mind, apparently the year 1795 (when the 28th and the 7th fell on Thursdays). I could invoke Volney again to establish the decade as the 1790s, but I am reluctant to use that means because some critics have raised questions about MWS quoting from not only Coleridge's \i Rime of the Ancient Mariner \i0 (1798) but also such poems as Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey" (1798) and PBS's \i Alastor \i0 (1816). That kind of anachronism, however, is not at all unusual in fiction, when a narrative that is set in the past might contain a quotation from or allusion to a later poem. The monster reading Volney is quite a different thing indeed, and an anachronism there would have been a serious fault. But MWS was too careful for that fault, and the proof that the setting of \i Frankenstein \i0 is in the last decade of the eighteenth century is revealed in a manuscript change that shows again the care with which both MWS and PBS attempted to address this issue. See transcription page 459, lines 4-5, in this edition for the \i 1818 \i0 text where Victor remarks that he was in Oxford "more than a century and a half" after Charles I collected his forces there\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 since that year was 1642, then Victor must have been in Oxford between 17[93] and 17[99], and other evidence in the internal chronology would establish that Victor and Clerval visited Oxford in 17[96]. That both MWS and PBS had the 1790s in mind is further revealed by their alterations to Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 11, page 111, lines 24-25 (on pages 458-459 in this edition): MWS first wrote "above a century before" and then revised it to "two centuries before"; then PBS more precisely altered the phrase to "century & a half before," thereby designating the last decade of the eighteenth century for the temporal setting of \i Frankenstein, \i0 a decade that had personal and political events that MWS embedded in her narrative.\super 46}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi348\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 That MWS may have created her own private chronology of events in \i Frankenstein \i0 is further evidenced by these Draft and Fair-Copy Notebooks. See, e.g., transcription pages 15 (lines 31-32), 23 (line 13), 127 (line 25), and 537 (lines 30-31), where crucial ages and dates are altered or omitted in order to accommodate some sequence of events that had already been or was being established. In other places, changes were made not in Draft or Fair Copy but between the earlier state(s) and the first edition, as a glance at the parallel text of \i 1818 Will \i0 reveal: see, e.g., transcription pages 153 (line 6) and 159 (line 24) for someone altering the date of Alphonse Frankenstein's letter from 2 June in Draft to 12 May in \i 1818.\super 47\nosupersub  \i0 Sometimes the Fair Copy is involved in this\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 e.g., MWS dated one of Elizabeth's letters 18 February in Draft, altered it there to 18 May, introduced the date of April in the Fair Copy only to cancel it and settle on 18 May, which became the date in \i 1818 \i0 (see transcription pages 537 and 647). It is clear something was going on with these changes: there may have been not only a chronology but also, and simultaneously, a personal numerology dictating some of the choices. Most of the evidence suggests that it was MWS rather than PBS who was making the choices, but there are times when PBS, as collaborator, was respecting what appears to have been MWS's plan.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li770\fi0\ri0\sb492\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs30 MWS \scaps and \scaps0 PBS's \scaps Collaboration in The \i0 Frankenstein \i Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri0\sb190\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 A \i0 central issue in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks is the evidence they provide for the degree of collaboration between MWS and PBS in the making of the novel. The nature of PBS's involvement has already been suggested in various remarks above, the evidence of that involvement awaits the reader in the texts of this edition, and the specifics of his involvement are offered in the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" that follows this Introduction. But a few general remarks are appropriate at this point in order to give the reader an overview of what might be called the conception, gestation, quickening, lightening, and birth of MWS's monster. MWS herself encouraged the use of such a metaphor by which to understand her \i Frankenstein: \i0 in her \i 1831}\par }