{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl510\margr1314\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn510\margrsxn1314\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7682\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9662 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri22\sb545\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction (pages v, xii) she described how she did "dilate upon, so very hideous an idea," and she called her novel not only "the offspring of happy days" but also a "hideous progeny" that she bade to "go forth and prosper" in the literary world. If, as this edition will make evident, MWS is the creative genius by which this novel was conceived and developed, we can call PBS an able midwife who helped his wife bring her monster to life. His "hand" is in evidence in each of the extant \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks, and the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below demonstrates his involvement in the printing, publishing, and reviewing of the novel. That PBS collaborated on this novel should come as no surprise to anyone, because the Shelleys left a long history of their shared activities as creative artists. They transcribed and they edited each other's works; they encouraged each other to undertake or to modify major works; and they even collaborated in the publication of \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour \i0 at a time when \i Frankenstein \i0 was being readied for the press. It is hoped that this edition will encourage someone to undertake a major study of this collaboration, which extended from the sublime (MWS's \i Frankenstein; \i0 or PBS's later response to this "Modern Prometheus" in his \i Prometheus Unbound) \i0 to the ridiculous (the two Shelleys engaged in a rhyming game in one of their pocket books, MWS providing the rhyming words and PBS filling out each line).\super 48}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi350\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 A reading of the evidence in these \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks should make clear that PBS's contributions to \i Frankenstein \i0 were no more than what most publishers' editors have provided new (or old) authors or, in fact, what colleagues have provided to each other after reading each other's works in progress.\super 49\nosupersub  What MWS actually thought of PBS's involvement in her text we will never know, no matter what methodology or facts we bring to this issue. I personally prefer to give both of them the benefit of the doubt and conjecture that (1) PBS suggested and made alterations to the text of \i Frankenstein \i0 for the purpose of improving an already excellent narrative (in [PFebruary 1818] he wrote a review that judged the published novel "one of the most original and complete productions of the day") and that (2) MWS accepted the suggestions and alterations that she agreed with. What this edition of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks provides for the first time is the available evidence by which to trace MWS's developing artistry as she drafted and then fair copied her novel. Even though she grew up in a family of writers and publishers (her father and step-mother ran the Juvenile Library and published books for children), this was her first experience writing and preparing a major work for publication. The fact that PBS had greater experience, having seen two of his own novels through the press as well as a number of volumes of poetry, might have given him a professional edge in their relationship, but that experience did not make PBS into a better novelist (his own novels, written before he was 20 years old, have little merit).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi360\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 One of the purposes of this edition is to provide a solid and accurate foundation for future scholarship on MWS and on \i Frankenstein, \i0 in effect to counteract the increasing number of misinformed and misleading judgments about the novel, about the manuscripts, and about the Shelleys' collaboration. James Rieger (1974) was the first to mislead when, in his otherwise excellent edition, he provocatively phrased and overstated PBS's involvement with the text and subordinated MWS to her husband. According to Rieger, PBS "oversaw his wife's manuscript at every stage," corrected "her frequent grammatical solecisms, her spelling, and her awkward phrasing," and assisted to such a degree "at every point in the book's manufacture . . . that one hardly knows whether to regard him as editor or minor collaborator" (page xviii). Although these judgments reflect a great deal of truth (and collaboration merely means to "work with" not to "equally divide the labor"), their repetition in his "Note on the Text" that then challengingly asked "Do we or do we not owe [PBS] a measure of 'final authority'?" (page xliv) seemed to devalue MWS's accomplishments.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi358\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 More damaging to future scholarship was Rieger's misleading statement that "it was Shelley's idea that Frankenstein journey to England for the purpose of creating a female Monster" (page xviii). This judgment has misled many who without benefit of the manuscript have attempted to understand the contribution of PBS, who did in fact write in the margin that "I think the journey to England ought to be \i Victor's \i0 proposal" (see pages 424-425 in this edition). But PBS wrote this \i only after \i0 MWS had plotted the journey for the creating of the female and \i only because \i0 MWS originally had the idea of the trip drop casually from Victor's father, who suggested that his son take a two-year holiday while accompanying Clerval to England. All PBS did here was to ask MWS to change the source of the original idea for the trip, to have Victor "lead his father to this [idea of a journey] in the conversations" (PBS's marginal note to MWS) so that Victor would appear to be more}\par }