{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1476\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1476\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1094 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ixviii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri14\sb638\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 in control of his destiny. When PBS wrote this note, the monster had already asked for a mate, Victor had already promised to create one, and Victor had "resolved to fulfil [his] promise while abroard \i [sic]\i0 " (see pages 398-399,410-411, and 440-441 in this edition). In fact, PBS probably did not make his marginal suggestion until after MWS had written the later chapters in which Victor left Clerval behind in Edinburgh and journeyed on alone in order to create the mate; in any event (as most likely would be evidenced by the missing ur-text), PBS was not responsible for Victor's idea of creating a mate, and Rieger's unfortunate phrasing has misled a number of critics (see especially "Huet" below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi360\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 After Rieger's edition came E. B. Murray's "Shelley's Contribution to Mary's \i Frankenstein" \i0 (1978), which was based on some but not all \i oi the Ab'mger Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts (Dep. c. 534/1-2 only), leading Murray to conclude misleadingly that PBS was responsible for a "thousand or so" words in \i Frankenstein\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 whereas he actually wrote and was responsible for more than 4000 words. Like Rieger, Murray judged many of these alterations to be minor: they "merely rewrite what Mary had written in order to provide a context for a given correction or addition," or they offered "dictional, grammatical, or syntactical variations." Murray added, however, that many changes were "creative additions which . . . help to shape atmosphere, incident, character, reader-response, and, consequently, aid in establishing the moral and aesthetic tone of the novel" (page 51). Then, to illustrate the way that PBS fair copied the Draft, Murray provided representative passages in parallel texts, keying the manuscripts not to \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 but confusingly to \i 1831 Joseph.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi367\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Comparing Murray's transcriptions to the evidence in this edition will show that Murray, like all others who have ventured into The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks, failed at times to distinguish PBS's hand from that of MWS. In those cases where I myself am unsure, I have employed footnotes to query the attribution that the fonts seem to prescribe, thereby alerting the reader to the problem of attribution. Any count of PBS words in the Notebooks has to be factored through these queries: that is, should only half of all the words queried as either "?PBS" or "?MWS" be counted as PBS's? or should \i 75% \i0 of those queried "?PBS" be counted and only 25 % of those queried " ?MWS " ? There are other circumstances that make any attempt at an exact count foolhardy. Easiest to count, of course, are the words that PBS added to the Draft, which were then retained in the Fair Copy and printed in \i 1818. \i0 Also easy to count are those words that PBS was responsible for when he transcribed the final section of the Draft into the Fair Copy. Still, each of these cases involves two different kinds of words: those that are totally new, having been added to the text; and those that are merely modifications of MWS's words, some of which are merely relative pronouns: see, e.g., transcription page 455 where PBS altered MWS's "source of amusement" to "source of \i observation & \i0 amusement" and where he altered MWS's "that" to \i "which" \i0 (an alteration that frequently punctuates these Notebooks). Did PBS add two or three words to this page (that is, should we count "which")? Whose word is it if PBS transformed MWS's "men" into \i "fishermen" \i0 (see pages 478-479 in this edition)? Even more difficult in the counting are those places where PBS transformed one MWS word into two PBS words, changed an MWS tense, corrected an MWS spelling, canceled an MWS word without making any substitution, or revised an MWS passage only to have MWS learn from it and rephrase not her old text but the new PBS text. Establishing a final and exact count for the PBS words in \i 1818 \i0 is impossible, although above I have hazarded a number in excess of 4000.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi343\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 After Rieger and Murray came Anne K. Mellor's \i Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters \i0 (1988), which offered the most extensive analysis of the Shelleys' collaboration to date. Mellor's study had the benefit of being a balanced one, for it stressed that PBS's alterations to MWS's novel "both improved and damaged the text and . . . must be analyzed with care."\super 50\nosupersub  On balance, however, although Mellor correctly judged that PBS was "responsible for much of the most inflated rhetoric in the text," her Appendix on "Percy Shelley's Revisions of the Manuscript of \i Frankenstein" \i0 (pages 219-224) seems to credit PBS for many improvements to the text. Consider the topic sentences that Mellor used to introduce a series of paragraphs: "On several occasions, Percy clarified the text" by eliminating such things as a "vague comment" here or a "sloppy" phrase there; "Percy frequently substituted more precise technical terms for Mary's cruder ones"; "Some of Percy's revisions markedly improved the coherence and narrative continuity of the text"; "Percy occasionally improved Mary's paragraph transitions"; "Percy several times enriched the thematic resonance of the text"; "Percy further developed the complexity of the monster's character in several revisions"; and}\par }