{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl630\margr1211\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn630\margrsxn1211\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7723\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9703 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixix}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri19\sb614\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 "Percy stressed Victor Frankenstein's unique responsibility for his creature." Anyone objecting that Mellor gave too much credit to PBS in these pages is reminded to check all of her readings of PBS's hand against the evidence in this edition and also to consider that MWS most likely would have made some or many of the PBS improvements if she alone had been responsible for correcting the Draft and transcribing it in the Fair Copy.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi355\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 If Mellor inadvertently gave more credit to PBS than either Rieger or Murray, then Marie-Helene Huet has outdone them all in her \i Monstrous Imagination \i0 (1993), which misread the evidence in Rieger and in Murray and possibly in Mellor and which changed PBS from collaborator to co-author. Had Huet consulted the manuscripts before publishing her book, she would not have rashly claimed that PBS was responsible for the "contrast between Victor and Elizabeth and the suggestion that Victor should create a female" (page 154). Both judgments are false, for MWS had established that contrast (what she and not PBS had called "a great dissimilitude"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 10-11 in this edition) before PBS made any alterations, and it was MWS not PBS who introduced Victor's decision to create a female (see above on "Rieger," who apparently misled Huet). Huet compounded a misreading of evidence when she claimed that PBS wrote the monster's "final words . . . \super\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\nosupersub\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I shall collect my funeral pile. . .'"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 a glance at pages 640-641 in this edition will confirm that MWS wrote the sentence, and pages 769 and 816 will demonstrate the small alterations that PBS made to the original sentence when he fair copied it in May 1817. PBS was not the one who "wrote the dramatic denouement on the sea of ice," and it was patently unfair to claim that "it is impossible to assign with absolute certainty either to Percy or to Mary Shelley \i complete \i0 creative responsibility for any part of the novel" (pages 156,155). The words "absolute" and "certainty" and \i "complete" \i0 make such a statement difficult to refute, but this edition will supply enough evidence to indicate the advisory role that PBS had in the making of MWS's monster.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi358\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Huet had many important things to say, and it is unfortunate that she based much of her analysis on incorrect readings of the evidence. One good thing, however, that comes from her mistakes, is a reminder of just how important a manuscript is to literary analysis. This facsimile edition, of course, is both a substitute and not a substitute for the original: future scholarly work on \i Frankenstein \i0 might begin with these photofacsimiles, but some textual scholars may need to consult the disassembled Notebooks currently on deposit at the Bodleian Library. In some cases, however, this photofacsimile edition may be more useful to scholarship than the now disbound Notebooks, because it distills and arranges some otherwise difficult-to-interpret evidence. The mere type facsimiles may keep future scholars from misreading words or hands or from conjecturing in such a way as to misrepresent the composition of these Notebooks. The very complexity of the Notebooks, for example, has partly misled David Ketterer in his recent articles on the \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts. Ketterer has done good work in his "Readings" (1995), "Draft" (1996), and "Insert" (forthcoming, 1997)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see "Short Titles" for the full references\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 but his articles would have been more soundly based had they waited upon the publication of this edition. Not that my reading of the evidence is the only way, but this edition would have made it easier for him to consider, cite, and illustrate the evidence for his arguments\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 as it is, his use \i of \expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  Rieger \i0 as a guide makes some of his arguments difficult to follow. I have addressed some of his misreadings in the Short Titles, in the Introduction, and in the \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology," but I acknowledge here that my work is the better because of the hours that Ketterer and I have debated the evidence. Such a scholarly debate, whether conducted in public or in private (in an Oxford pub or in telephone calls between Newark, Delaware, and Montreal), can improve scholarship, and it is my hope that the debate that this edition will occasion will increase our understanding of MWS's \i Frankenstein.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi353\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 At press time in August 1996,1 am benefiting by reading two forthcoming essays, both of which have been kindly provided me in page proofs: Ketterer's "Insert" and Johanna M. Smith's "Texts \i of Frankenstein." \i0 In both cases I have reciprocated with suggested "alterations" to these proofs that reflect my working with The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks for the past two years. For example, while it is true that sometimes only "tentative conclusions" can be drawn from the Abinger manuscripts, there is no reason to hypothesize any intervening text between what I have denominated the Draft and the Fair Copy. In fact, there is unequivocal evidence to prove that MWS transcribed directly from the Draft (which is in an "intermediate" state) to the Fair Copy (compare the texts as arranged in parallel columns in Appendix A; see the false starts in the Fair Copy that are apparently caused by the handwriting in the Draft; and, finally, recall that the margins of the Draft were}\par }