{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f4\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f6\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f8\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f10\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f12\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f16\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}{\f17\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f18\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f19\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f20\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f21\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f22\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f23\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f24\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f25\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f26\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f27\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f28\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f29\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f30\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f31\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f32\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f33\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f18\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw14527\paperh16610\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn14527\pghsxn16610\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 {\shp {\*\shpinst \shpleft-115\shptop7663\shpright-115\shpbottom8474\shpfhdr0\shpbxmargin\shpbypara\shpwr3\shpwrk0\shpfblwtxt1\shpz0\shplid1{\sp{\sn shapeType}{\sv 20}}{\sp{\sn lineWidth}{\sv 7620}}}}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1454\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx2537 \f18\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Ixxii\loch\f0\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-1\loch\f17\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1584\fi0\ri14\sb557\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f18\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 use of the cut-and-splice photofacsimile edition of \i\expndtw14 1818\expndtw0  Wolf-1 \i0 (apparently based on a microfilm of the copy from the Library of Congress), and I address the representational errors in that edition elsewhere in this Introduction (see "Emendations to and Anomalies in the \i\expndtw17 1818\expndtw0  \i0 Text").}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f18\fs20\pvpara\phcol\posnegx0\posnegy3710\absw0\absh-185\dfrmtxtx38\dfrmtxty0 {\b\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs16 v}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  13.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart13\pnindent528\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Although PBS may have transcribed other sections of the Draft into now missing sections of the Fair Copy, there is no evidence (including comparisons of the texts of the Draft and \i\expndtw22 1818)\expndtw0  \i0 to suggest that he did so.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  14.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart13\pnindent528\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 As I confess in the "Short Titles" under MWS \i Reader, \i0 I myself introduced a number of punctuation errors by using \i 1818 Wolf-1 \i0 as copy-text for my \i\expndtw17 1818\expndtw0  \i0 version of \i Frankenstein \i0 in that \i Reader. \i0 It seems that texts about monsters can breed monstrous texts.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri12\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  15.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri12\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart13\pnindent528\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 That is, MWS did not paginate the entire or large sections of her notebooks either in advance or after she had completed portions of her writing. See, e.g., the photofacsimiles on pages 288, 290, and 294 in this edition: page number "10" and the text on that page are both in darker ink; page number "11" has the same faint ink and thin pen cut as the text on that page; both ink and pen cut suggest that page number "13" was written before the fourth word of line 1 on that page was written.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  16.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi511\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2618 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart13\pnindent528\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is dangerous to speculate why MWS changed from foliating to paginating, but in the shadows of this note I suggest that she had first planned to use this notebook for the purposes of a rough draft that she could keep track of by mere foliation, that the first forty pages were written in a form no rougher than the surviving leaves, and that MWS decided to continue using this notebook for the formal drafting of her novel, paginating as she went along as she did in all or most drafts of her fiction. Such a speculation, however, does not account for the fact that the first forty pages of the Draft are now missing (for the equivalent in the \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 text, see pages 3-7 in this edition).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2093 \f18\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 |\loch\f0\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f17\cchs0 17.     The first example of Botfield paper is MS. Shelley adds. c. 5, folios 45-46 (two singletons, perhaps once}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1579\fi0\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f18\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 conjoint), containing MWS's undated fair copy of the added fourth chapter of PBS's fragment "The Assassins," the 1815 watermark being the only evidence that this fragment had been added to after the first part was composed on the Continent in August and September 1814 (for more detail about these leaves, see Editorial Commentary in PBS \i Prose, \i0 I, 384; but note that Murray mistakenly identified the watermark fancy letters as "TW&B" rather than "TW&BB"\loch\af17\hich\af17\dbch\f18\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af17\dbch\af18\loch\f17\cchs0 the initials standing for Thomas William & Beriah Botfield). The second example of Botfield paper is MS. Shelley adds, c. 4, folios 194-195 (two singletons, perhaps once conjoint), containing a part of PBS's fragmentary draft materials for "Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics," undated (for photofacsimiles of and additional information on these pages, see Murray, adds. c. 4, pages 218-225, 489, and 517; see also note 20 below for a Pforzheimer fragment of "Speculations," textually related to this one, that could well be on waste paper from Draft Notebook B). Both these examples also show possible marks of sewing holes at their inside edges, though their edges are too badly damaged to determine if the paper originated as loose sheets or as leaves from a sewn notebook. There is a third possible example of Botfield paper (MS. Shelley adds. c. 12, folio 21), but it is too small to show any signs of sewing holes. PBS used this small scrap of paper (with a fragmentary watermark comprising the lower left part of a triple oval and the date 181[ ], exactly matching those parts of the Botfield Britannia) for his undated note (? 13 May 1815-? 3 0 December 1816) to MWS that accompanied his cheque of \loch\af17\hich\af17\dbch\f18\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af17\dbch\af18\loch\f17\cchs0 300 payable to "Miss Godwin" for emergency use (see PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 426-427). Economy of evidence would suggest that all these leaves came from the same batch of paper, maybe even from one folio notebook. In none of them is it possible to be certain whether the writing was done by MWS or PBS before or after removal from the putative notebook, but the balance of evidence favors the idea that it was being pulled apart as a quarry for blank paper rather than as a collective repository for miscellaneous prose: The "Assassins" material was the continuation of a text started on loose sheets; PBS's "Speculations" was so scrappy that their very continuity is in doubt; and PBS's fragmentary note to MWS was clearly a loose scrap of paper.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1589\fi506\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2621 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  18.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1589\fi506\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2621 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart18\pnindent526\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 This unique watermark of "TW&BB I 1809" in the Bodleian collections (Abinger Dep. c. 523) is on paper used by William Godwin to write to his wife on 11 September 1812 during his brief stop at Bath while traveling to Bristol.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1589\fi506\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2621 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  19.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1589\fi506\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2621 \f18\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart18\pnindent526\pnf18{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f18\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The Quiring Charts will draw attention to two other anomalies: two of the pages in "X" (folios 14 verso and 15 recto) are blank, even though the text passes continuously around them from 14 recto to 15 verso (suggesting that MWS may have accidentally turned over two leaves as she drafted her revisions); and the pagination in both "X" and " Y" is erratic (partly resulting from the way MWS numbered the pages to identify the path through these two groups of pages). Also of some significance is that two of these pages (folios 12 recto and 16 recto), namely, the beginning pages of "X" and " Y" (the first canceled and replaced by the second with the heading "another Chapter" in PBS's hand) have MWS's regular style of a page number at a top corner that is separated from the text by a curved line (represented in my type facsimiles by a parenthesis). In both cases, however, the number appears at the top left or inner margin of a recto (rather than the usual position of a page number at the top right or outer margin of a recto), and in both cases the pagination would not be consistent with the last extant page 21, an odd number on a verso. Clearly there was some kind of lapse between now missing pages 22 and \i 56.}\par }