{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1462\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1462\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1087 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Ixxiv\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri24\sb600\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 beginning her Draft in Continental Notebook A (most likely acquired in or around Geneva) and then continuing her Draft in a British Notebook B (possibly acquired in Bath); MWS making Journal references to the early Notebook A inserts on 27 October 1816, to Notebook A's page " 137" on 20 November 1816, and to the now lost intersection of Notebooks A and B on 5 December 1816. Ketterer bases much of his speculation on a reading of the sequence of the Maimouna/ Amina/Safie references in what I have called the "X" and "Y" inserts in Notebook B. See my analysis of the "Safie" name changes, all of which make perfect sense in the order in which MWS made them within a very short period in April 1817\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see also pages 314-341 in this edition, especially the explanations on the shadowed pages.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  35.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 I am indebted to Donald H. Reiman for pointing out these antecedents to me. Hogg in his \i Life of Shelley \i0 remarked that PBS had always called Mrs. Boinville "the presiding divinity 'Meimoune'. Why he gave her this name I could never learn. She did not resemble the heroine of the Oriental tale in appearance, conduct, or opinions." Peacock in his \i Memoirs of Shelley \i0 corrected Hogg and claimed that PBS called Mrs.- Boinville "not Meimoune, but Maimuna, from Southey's \i Thalaba" \i0 (see \i Life of Shelley, \i0 II, 137, 326). For the name in "The Assassins," see PBS \i Prose, \i0 1,137. See also \i Clairmont Journals, \i0 page 424, for a reference to a "Maimonna" who was a daughter shaped by her mother (Nora Crook drew my attention to this reference).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  36.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 One of the antecedents to the name of "Safie" may be found in John Hamilton Reynolds' \i Safie. An Eastern Tale, \i0 and it may be much more than a coincidence that MWS first met Reynolds just two months before she used the name of Safie\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see \i MWS Journal, \i0 I,162, for Reynolds and MWS supping with the Hunts in Hampstead on 5 February 1817.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  37.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For a recent but unverified suggestion about the name "Frankenstein," see Ketterer's "Name" note where he quotes " Atticus" in the London \i Sunday Times \i0 for 30 October 1994: "Atticus" (the name that Taki Theodoracopulos adopts for his column) claimed to have heard that MWS "decided to name the scientist Frankenstein after the nicest man she knew, Baron Frankenstein, the German consul in Geneva" at that time. Ketterer confesses, however, that his letter of inquiry to a German archivist in Berlin did not provide any corroborating evidence of this claim. Perhaps Ketterer or another can make further inquiries in Geneva or elsewhere. For other suggestions about the name "Frankenstein," see Palacio, pages 93-94, n.5.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  38.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 If the Walton story did not exist in the ur-text, then MWS could not have noticed or created until later (not before September 1816) the set of parallel initials for Walton's married sister, Margaret Walton Saville: MWS was writing as if she were Walton who was writing letters to his sister "MWS." It is possible that MWS created the sister's name of "MWS" (or at least the name of "Margaret") as early as September 1816, by which time the outside frame had been begun in the missing forty pages of Notebook A; but it is also possible that MWS did not create the sister's full married name until after she married PBS in December 1816 and officially became MWS. We know that "Margaret" was the name in the final pages of the Draft that were written in March/April 1817, but it is possible that the name "Saville" was not finally decided upon until April 1817, by which time the choice of the innermost name "Safie" would be strongly echoed by the name "Saville" if pronounced as a French name. It is more than possible that the choice of one of these names involved the choice of the other.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  39.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Although there are other places in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks where it is much more evident that MWS copied and then canceled and then recopied portions of a previous text, consider a possible instance of this on page 44 of what is now Ch. 2: MWS first wrote and then canceled "The C" and then wrote another sentence and then wrote "The catastrophe ..." (see transcription page 29, lines 29-30, in this edition).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  40.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 See especially Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 13, where MWS canceled lines 16-25 on her page 138 only to rewrite them at lines 22-31 on page 142; she also canceled words in lines 12-13 on page 142 and rewrote them in lines 17-19; and she canceled lines 3-5 on page 147 and rewrote them at lines 10-13 on the same page (see pages 222-223,230-231,240-241 in this edition).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  41.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Pamela Clemit does not remark on this distinction between the two manuscripts (Abinger Dep. 374/1-2) in her edition of MWS \i Mathilda, \i0 but she does print the "The Fields of Fancy" in an appendix, thereby enabling a comparison of the two texts. Photofacsimiles of part of the manuscript of "The Fields of Fancy" may be consulted in Murray, \i d.l; \i0 another Bodleian manuscript containing parts of "Mathilda" is Shelley adds. c. 5\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  see MWS "Mathilda" in the "Short Titles."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  42.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 See transcription page 561 for MWS's almost verbatim transcription from PBS's Geneva Diary (or from an ur-text that had incorporated that passage).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb2\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  43.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb2\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart35\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The canceled "156" in this calculation is merely the sum of "104" and "52" without the "24"; and the "17" to the side may have been a false start for the sums of "180," one of which is off to the other side.}\par }