{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl628\margr1182\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn628\margrsxn1182\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7555\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9530 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb660\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 24 January 1816      MWS and PBS's son William Shelley was born.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri48\sb262\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 March/April 1816 Claire Clairmont, who began her relationship with Lord Byron at this time in London, wrote to him that "the Creator [Byron] ought not to destroy his Creature [Claire]" \i \{Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 24), a phrasing that anticipates the circumstances of \i Frankenstein.\super 3}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri43\sb254\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 2 May 1816 MWS, PBS, their son William, and Claire Clairmont (pregnant with Byron's child) departed London for their journey to Switzerland.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri36\sb254\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6 May 1816 Claire Clairmont from Paris wrote to Byron in Geneva that she and the Shelley party would soon arrive in Geneva and that she had "taken the name of Clairville because you said you liked the name of Clare but could not bear \ul mont\ul0  because of that very ugly woman [Mrs. Clermont, who had been a maid in Byron's household]" \i (Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 43), a naming that may bear on the name of "Clairval" and "Clerval" in \i Frankenstein.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri38\sb252\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 13 May 1816 MWS, PBS, and their party arrived at Lake Geneva and temporarily resided at the Hotel d'Angleterre at Secheron.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri22\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 June 1816 MWS from Geneva wrote to [PFanny Imlay Godwin] that "The thunder storms that visit us are grander and more terrific than I have ever seen before. We watch them as they approach from the opposite side of the lake, observing the lightning play among the clouds in various parts of the heavens, and dart in jagged figures upon the piny heights of Jura, dark with the shadow of the overhanging cloud, while perhaps the sun is shining cheerily upon us. One night we \i enjoyed \i0 a finer storm than I had ever beheld. The lake was lit up\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 the pines on Jura made visible, and all the scene illuminated for an instant, when a pitchy blackness succeeded, and the thunder came in frightful bursts over our heads amid the darkness" \i (History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour, \i0 pages 99-100; also printed in MWS \i Letters, \i0 1,20). (This description formed the basis for Victor's description of a thunderstorm upon his return to Geneva from Ingolstadt [see pages 168-171 in this edition]; for MWS transforming her other personal experiences [as well as those of PBS] into the text of \i Frankenstein, \i0 see 23 June and 24 July 1816 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri24\sb254\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 10 June 1816 Byron moved into the Villa Diodati, just a few minutes from the Maison Chappuis, where MWS, PBS, and Claire Clairmont had moved\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 in the evenings they would walk to Diodati to visit Byron and his doctor John William Polidori.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri14\sb250\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15 June 1816 Polidori entered in his Geneva Diary that at Diodati "Shelley and I had a conversation about principles,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 whether man was to be thought merely an instrument" \i (Polidori Diary, \i0 page 123). It is impossible to determine if this "conversation about principles" preceded, precipitated, or followed the ghost-story competition proposed by Byron at this time\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 that is to say, the ghost stories could have begun \i\expndtw30 (1)\expndtw0  \ul before 15 June\ul0  \i0 (as is suggested by MWS's recollection of her delay in conceiving a story); (2) \i\ul on 15 June,\ul0  \i0 with the possibility that what Polidori recorded as a "conversation about principles" between PBS and Polidori was actually what MWS later remembered as one of the "conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley" on "the principle of life" (see 16 June below); or (3) \i\ul on 16 June\ul0  \i0 (the date often given for the start of the stories).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi365\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 As MWS recalled in her \i 1831 \i0 Introduction, she and others read "Some volumes of ghost stories, translated from the German into French";\super 4\nosupersub  then "'We will each write a ghost story,' said Lord Byron; and his proposition was acceded to. There were four of us [MWS omitted Claire Clairmont as a participant although she may have contributed a story\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 6 October 1817 below]. The noble author [Byron] began a tale, a fragment of which he printed at the end of his poem of Mazeppa [see 17 June 1816 below]. Shelley . . . commenced one founded on the experiences of his early life.\super 5\nosupersub  Poor Polidori had some terrible idea about a skull-headed lady, who was so punished for peeping through a key-hole [see 17 and 18 and 19 June 1816 below]. . . . f I busied myself \i to think of a story,\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 a story to rival those which had excited us to the task. One which would speak to the mysterious fears of our nature,}\par }