{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1452\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1452\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1193 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Ixxviii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri38\sb634\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 and awaken thrilling horror\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 one to make the reader dread to look round, to curdle the blood, and quicken the beatings of the heart. If I did not accomplish these things, my ghost story would be unworthy of its name. I thought and pondered\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 vainly. . . . \i Have you thought of a story? \i0 I was asked each morning, and each morning I was forced to reply with a mortifying negative" \i [1831, \i0 pages vii-ix].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri36\sb264\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?16] June 1816 It is possible that what MWS remembered as the most important of the "conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley" on "the principle of life" actually took place on 16 June (the day after PBS and Polidori "had a conversation about principles"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 15 June 1816 above), producing the dream that then led to MWS beginning her story on 17 June.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi355\ri14\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 According to MWS's \i 1831 \i0 Introduction, "Many and long were the conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener. During one of these [after the ghost stories were begun but before MWS had thought of her story], various philosophical doctrines were discussed, and among others the nature of the principle of life, and whether there was any probability of its ever being discovered and communicated. They talked of the experiments of Dr. Darwin, (I speak not of what the Doctor really did, or said that he did, but, as more to my purpose, of what was then spoken of as having been done by him,) who preserved a piece of vermicelli in a glass case, till by some extraordinary means it began to move with voluntary motion. Not thus, after all, would life be given. Perhaps a corpse would be re-animated; galvanism had given token of such things: perhaps the component parts of a creature might be manufactured, brought together, and endued with vital warmth, f Night waned upon this talk; and even the witching hour had gone by, before we retired to rest. When I placed my head on my pillow, I did not sleep, nor could I be said to think. My imagination, unbidden, possessed and guided me, gifting the successive images that arose in my mind with a vividness far beyond the usual bounds of reverie. I saw\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 with shut eyes, but acute mental vision\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I saw the pale student of unhallowed arts kneeling beside the thing he had put together. I saw the hideous phantasm of a man stretched out, and then, on the working of some powerful engine, show signs of life, and stir with an uneasy, half vital motion. Frightful must it be; for supremely frightful would be the effect of any human endeavour to mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator of the world. . . . He [the student] would hope . . . that this thing, which had received such imperfect animation, would subside into dead matter; and he might sleep in the belief that the silence of the grave would quench for ever the transient existence of the hideous corpse which he had looked upon as the cradle of life. He sleeps; but he is awakened; he opens his eyes; behold the horrid thing stands at his bedside, opening his curtains, and looking on him with yellow, watery, but speculative eyes, f I opened mine in terror. \expndtw33 ...\expndtw0  I could not so easily get rid of my hideous phantom; still it haunted me. I must try to think of something else. I recurred to my ghost story,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 my tiresome unlucky ghost story! O! if I could only contrive one which would frighten my reader as I myself had been frightened that night! f Swift as light and as cheering was the idea that broke in upon me. \super C\nosupersub I have found it! What terrified me will terrify others; and I need only describe the spectre which had haunted my midnight pillow.' On the morrow [?17 June] I announced that I had \i thought of a story. \i0 I began that day with the words, \i It was on a dreary night of November, \i0 making only a transcript of the grim terrors of my waking dream" \i (1831, \i0 pages ix-xi). (The fact that these words appear not at the beginning but rather in Draft, Vol. I, Ch. \scaps 7a \scaps0 [see transcription page \i 97 \i0 in this edition], argues for the existence of an "ur-text"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 a preliminary but no longer surviving "story" that MWS wrote and possibly even finished in the summer of 1816\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 24 July 1816 below.]}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx283 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  17\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx283 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart17\pnindent273\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1816 Polidori entered in his Diary that "The ghost-stories are begun by all but me" \i (Polidori Diary, \i0 page 125), suggesting that MWS had begun her story on or by 17 June 1816. (Byron seems to have concluded his participation in the story-telling by this time, for his "A Fragment" was headed with the date \i "June \i0 17, 1816"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see \i Mazeppa, A Poem \i0 [London: John Murray, 1819], pages 59-69. For texts of Byron's "A Fragment" and of Polidori's \i The Vampyre, \i0 see \i 1818 Rieger, \i0 Appendix C, pages 260-287; see also \i Polidori Fiction, \i0 pages 171-176 and 33-49 [but note the emendations made by the editors to Polidori's tale].)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri2\sb254\sa0\sl-254\slmult0\tx283 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  18\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri2\sb254\sa0\sl-254\slmult0\tx283 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart17\pnindent273\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1816 Polidori recorded in his Geneva Diary that "Shelley and party here. Mrs. S[helley] called me her brother (younger). Began my ghost-story after tea. Twelve o'clock, really began to talk ghostly. L[ord] Bfyron] repeated some verses of Coleridge's \i Christabel, \i0 of the witch's breast; when silence ensued, and Shelley, suddenly}\par }