{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl515\margr1300\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn515\margrsxn1300\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7567\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9545 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxxv}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri31\sb605\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 9 \i0 April 1817 The postmark on William Godwin's letter to MWS, on the address leaf of which MWS wrote one of the corrections to her novel, provides a \i terminus ante quern non \i0 for the correction (see 10-17 April 1817 below; see also transcription pages 417 and 419 in this edition).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri24\sb271\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 April 1817 MWS entries of "Correct F." in her Marlow Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,166-168) refer to her correcting Notebooks A and B for a period of eight days. (These corrections almost certainly involved Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, original pages 98-102 [see pages 416-441 in this edition, especially the shaded explanatory notes on transcription pages 417 and 429]; they most likely involved a complete rereading and correcting of the text in Notebooks A and B; and they probably involved the rewriting of Draft: Vol. II, Chs. [4] and [5] [see 5 December 1816 above as well as transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see also 29 April 1817 below when MWS may have also corrected the Draft]. At this time it is also likely that MWS decided to transform her two-volume novel in Draft into a three-volume novel in Fair Copy.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18 April-13 May 1817 MWS entries of "Transcribe" and "transcribe" (as well as "Transcribe all day" on 24 and 25 April, "Transcribe and correct F." on 29 April, and "Finish transcribing" on 10-13 May) in her Marlow Journal indicate that she transcribed the text from Draft Notebooks A and B into [Peleven] Fair-Copy Notebooks, of which only parts of Notebooks CI and C2 survive. (Of the twenty-six possible transcription days between 18 April and 13 May, the entries in MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,168-169, clearly indicate that she transcribed on at least twelve days [18-25 April; at least once during 26-29 April; at least once during 30 April-3 May; at least once during 4-9 May; at least once during 10-13 May], and they suggest that she may have transcribed on twenty-three or even all twenty-six days. See separate entry on 29 April 1817 below. Once again, the entry of "Transcribe all day\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 work after tea" on 24 April suggests that "work" did not refer to the writing of \i Frankenstein.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi360\ri26\sb7\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 During this same period, it appears that MWS and PBS made the marginal and interlinear calculations in Notebooks A and B by which they recorded and/or estimated the number of Fair-Copy pages used to transcribe the Draft (see "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" in Introduction).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri24\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 29 April 1817 MWS entered "Transcribe and correct F." in her Marlow Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 168). (It is impossible to determine what notebook section MWS had to "correct" on 29 April: she could have corrected the Fair-Copy Notebook that she was transcribing; or she may have had to correct a section of Notebook A or B before she fair copied it. Nevertheless, because MWS on 29 April may have been about halfway through her fair copying [see 18 April-13 May 1817 above], it is possible that she was correcting one more time the "trauma" or intersection of Notebooks A and B, where the "very long" Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [4] and the following Ch. [5] were involved\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 5 December 1816 above.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri24\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [P10-13] May 1817 For some unknown reason PBS wrote out the final 12\super 3\nosupersub /\sub 4\nosupersub  pages of the Fair Copy (see pages 748-773 in this edition), providing an opportunity to contrast the ways that the two Shelleys approached the task of transcribing the Draft into the Fair Copy. (See Appendix A for parallel texts of the Draft and the extant Fair Copy, the evidence demonstrating that PBS took greater liberties with the Draft than did MWS.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi362\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Some time after [ ? 10-13 ] May 1817, the PBS Fair Copy was damaged by amateurish cutting of these pages from Notebook C2, and then MWS re-transcribed the damaged PBS Fair Copy. She might have made this re-transcription shortly after the fair copying was finished; she most likely made it no later than 3 August 1817, when the Fair Copy was sent to PBS's publisher Charles Oilier for consideration (see 3 August 1817 below); and it is most unlikely that she made it after the Notebook was at the printer, because the PBS pages lack any evidence (e.g., the ink fingerprints, compositors' initials and notations, and folds that are on the other extant Fair-Copy pages) of having ever been sent to the printer.\super 18}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 14 May 1817 MWS entry in her Marlow Journal that "S. reads Hist of Fr. Rev. and corrects F. write Preface\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Finis." (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,169) indicates that PBS edited some or all of the Fair Copy and suggests that MWS herself wrote a preface after she transcribed her novel. (With possibly one exception, the extant Fair Copy does not evidence}\par }