{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl512\margr1316\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn512\margrsxn1316\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7440\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9410 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxxvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi367\ri26\sb626\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 On this same day, PBS from Marlow wrote to Hunt that "Bye-the-bye I have sent an MS. to Oilier concerning the true author of which I entreat you to be silent, if you should be asked any questions" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 551).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi343\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 By this day, it is likely that MWS had re-transcribed the PBS portion of the Fair Copy, the 12\super 3\nosupersub /\sub 4\nosupersub  pages at the end of the novel that he had fair copied on or just before 13 May (see [P10-13] May 1817 above); that is to say, neither MWS nor PBS would have wanted Oilier to see PBS's distinctive hand in the manuscript of the anonymous "friend" whom PBS was representing to the various publishers.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6 August 1817 PBS in a postscript to a MWS letter from Marlow to Marianne Hunt wrote that "Poor Mary's book came back with a refusal, which has put me rather in ill spirits. Does any kind friend of yours Marianne know any bookseller or has any influence with one? Any of those good tempered Robinsons? All these things are affairs of interest 8c preconception" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 40). (This postscript apparently indicates that Oilier rejected the novel after having it but a few days [hence PBS's "ill spirits" after asking Oilier on 3 August for an "early" decision]; PBS's cynical remarks on the publishing trade suggest that he did not have another publisher immediately in mind; and the old firm of the good-natured Robinsons [George, George, John, and James: they had published Godwin in the 1790s] had died out by 1813.\super 22\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6-9, \i0\b 10-13, \b0 14-17 August 1817 MWS entries in her Marlow Journal that she did "write the journal of our travels" and "write journal of our first travels" and "write" (MWS \i Journal, I,\i0 178) suggest that she was preparing fair copies for the first half of \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour, \i0 which was printed by C. H. Reynell and published by Thomas Hookham and Charles and James Oilier on 6 November 1817. (Although Hookham may have read and accepted for publication this first half of MWS and PBS's collaborative \i Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour \i0 as early as 24-29 August when he visited Marlow [MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,178-179], it is more likely that there was no publishing agreement until after 28 September 1817 when MWS inquired about any "prospect" for the book [see that date below as well as 10-12 October 1817 when MWS fair copied the second half of \i Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour]. \i0 These circumstances relate to the printing history of \i Frankenstein, \i0 which was also going through proofs in Autumn 1817 [see below, both entry and note, for 24 September 1817].)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx173 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  8\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx173 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart8\pnindent173\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 August 1817 PBS's concluding remark in a letter from Marlow to his publisher Charles Oilier ("I hope Frankenstein did not give you bad dreams" [PBS \i Letters, \i0 1,552]) suggests that Oilier had already (and quickly) read the novel and even communicated his decision not to publish it (see 3 August and 6 August 1817 above).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb257\sa0\sl-262\slmult0\tx173 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  9\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb257\sa0\sl-262\slmult0\tx173 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart8\pnindent173\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 August 1817 Charles Clairmont from France wrote to MWS in Marlow that "You say nothing more of your novel. Do not neglect it on any account, & send me one of the first copies" \i (Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 107).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18-24 August 1817 MWS entry of "A letter from Lackington" in her Marlow Journal (MWS \i Journal, I, \i0 178) most likely refers to the letter PBS answered on 22 August 1817 (see that date below). (The interest that the firm of Lackington, Allen, and Co. took in \i Frankenstein \i0 may have resulted from the nature of some of the books it had published since 1801. According to the two-page advertisement bound into many copies of \i Frankenstein, \i0 the "Books Published by Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, and Jones [the 1817-1820 incarnation of the partners] included Francis Barrett's \i The Magus; or Celestial Intelligences; a complete System of Occult Philosophy, being a Summary of all the best Writers on the subjects of Magic, Alchymy, Magnetism, the Cabala &c. \i0 . . . [1801]; [Francis Barrett's] \i Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers, with a Critical Catalogue of Books on Occult Chemistry . \i0 . . [1815]; Joseph Taylor's \i Apparitions; or, the Mystery of Ghosts, Hobgoblins, and Haunted Houses \i0 . . . [1814]; [Thomas Heywood's] \i The Life, Prophecies, and Predictions of Merlin Interpreted \i0 . . . [1813]; [John] \i Tolands Critical History of the Celtic Religion and Learning; containing an account of the Druids \i0 . . . [1815]; and Sarah Utterson's translation and adaptation of \i Tales of the Dead \i0 [ ? 1813, possibly the volume published by White, Cochrane, \i &c \i0 Co.], the English translation of Eyries' \i Fantasmagoriana, \i0 the very volume that may have led to the ghost-story competition in the first place\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 15 June 1816 above and note 4.)}\par }