{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1477\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1477\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1205 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 xc\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri7\sb636\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 the letters by tomorrow mornings coach I shall not be able but depend on them by the next day" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 54). (These "letters," which were undoubtedly the fair-copy "letters from Geneva" that MWS mentioned in her Marlow Journal for 10-12 October 1817 [see that date above], were apparently sent to PBS in a parcel to the publisher Hookham on 15 October\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, \i 56).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri17\sb269\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Pmiddle] October 1817 The evidence below for MWS and PBS reading proofs from the beginning gatherings of \i 1818: \i0 Vol. Ill suggests that the proofs \i ioil818: \i0 Vol. II were completed by this time (see 20 October, [22] October, and 28 October 1817 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri0\sb266\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?middle-late October] 1817 \i The British Critic, \i0 N.S., 8 (October 1817): 444, announced as "in the press" the two following works: \i "History of a Six Weeks' Tour through a Part of France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland; \i0 with Letters descriptive of a Sail round the Lake of Geneva, and of the Glaciers of Chamouni"; and "A Work of Imagination, entitled \i Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus, \i0 in three volumes." (I have been unable to determine on what day this issue of \i The British Critic \i0 appeared, although the second half of the month would be more likely because of the announcement of \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour. The British Critic \i0 listed \i Frankenstein \i0 as published in the January 1818 issue and subsequently reviewed it in April 1818 [see that date below].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri12\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 20 October 1817 MWS entered in her Marlow Journal that "On Monday [20 October] go to Hambden in a gig with Papa\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see Hambdens monument" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 181).\super 27\nosupersub  This excursion apparently caused MWS to make "considerable alterations" to the proofs for \i 1818: \i0 Vol. Ill, Ch. II, the chapter involving Victor's and Clerval's trip to Oxford and its "environs" where they "visited the tomb of the illustrious [John] Hampden, and the field on which that patriot fell." Although there are no Fair-Copy or proof pages to document these alterations, the dramatic differences between the Draft and \i\expndtw12 1818\expndtw0  \i0 (see transcription pages 457,459, and 461 in this edition) together with the evidence for [22] October and for 28 October 1817 make this a very likely cause and effect.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [22] October 1817 MWS entered in her Marlow Journal that she did "write translate F." (This "translate" has perplexed some critics who believed that MWS meant to record that she was translating Spinoza or Apuleius [see, e.g., MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,182, and n.4] or that she was actually translating \i Frankenstein \i0 into French [see, e.g., Sunstein, page 146]. It is almost certain, however, that MWS was using the word "translate" in the \i OED \i0 sense of "to transmute; to transform, alter" and that she was emending the proofs of the gathering signed "C" in \i 1818: \i0 Vol. Ill, Ch. 2, in order to record her most recent experiences in Hampden and, possibly at the same time, to record her and/or PBS's altered remarks about Oxford [see 20 October 1817 above and 28 October 1817 below].)\super 28}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 23 October 1817 PBS in London wrote to Lackington that "I do not see that I can amend your announce of \i Frankenstein. \i0 On my part I shall of course do my utmost \i for my friend, \i0 & no quarter in which I think it can [be] successfully recommended shall be neglected. You are of course aware how much depends upon extensive & judicious advertising: a part of the question which you are the most competent to understand. I have paid considerable attention to the correction of such few instances of baldness of style as necessarily occur in the production of a very young writer, & beg again to request that the printer, as a particular accomodation to me should be urged to expedition. \i fl \i0 shall return to Marlow tomorrow for a week or ten days during which time the proofs may be directed as before by the Marlow Coach" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 564-565).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri0\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 October 1817 PBS from Marlow wrote to "Messrs. Lackington & Co." that "I thought it necessary just to say that I shall not find it necessary in future to trouble the printer with any considerable alterations such as he will find in the present sheet & that which immediately preceded it. But the alterations will be found of the last importance to the interest of the tale" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 1,565). (Although there are no extant proof sheets to document these "considerable alterations" in the text that had been based on the Fair Copy, this important letter (in which PBS probably used the word "sheet" to denote an entire gathering of 24 pages in proof) almost certainly refers to alterations that MWS and/or PBS made to gatherings B and C in \i 1818: \i0 Vol. Ill, Chs. I\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 II. The "present sheet" would have been gathering "C" (pages 25-48 in Volume III) where MWS apparently did "translate" the proof in such}\par }