{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl524\margr1295\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn524\margrsxn1295\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7817\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9782 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xci}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri31\sb617\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 a way as to introduce her very recent experiences in Hampden on 20 October 1817 [see that date above; see also transcription pages 457, 459, and 461 in this edition]. The immediately preceding "sheet" would have been gathering "B" (pages 1-24 in Volume III) where MWS and/or PBS apparently deleted remarks on Holland and the Dutch and replaced them with new and important material on Henry Clerval that also contained quotations from Leigh Hunt's \i Story of Rimini \i0 and William Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey" [see transcription pages 449 and 451 in this edition; also note on page 449 that the revise made necessary by this "considerable alteration" led to an omission of a period after "friend" at the end of one of the interpolated paragraphs].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri26\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 3 November 1817 Although the printing of \i Frankenstein \i0 may not have been completed\super 29\nosupersub  and although the Shelleys were promised six free copies by the publishing agreement, the Lackington statement of account with PBS debited him \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 6 on 3 November 1817 for ten additional copies of \i Frankenstein \i0 in boards (see SC, V, 397), suggesting that PBS initially ordered these extra copies in early November and that, possibly, proofs were actually finished by that date. (For more on these six and ten copies, see 23 and 31 December 1817 and 2 January 1818 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri34\sb257\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6 November 1817 The official publication date of \i History of a Six Weeks' Tour \i0 ("Printed for T. Hookham, jun." and priced at 4s.6d.) according to advertisements in the \i Morning Chronicle \i0 of 30 October 1817 (page 1, column 4) and in the London \i Times \i0 of 1 November 1817 (page 4, column 3).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri14\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22\sub 5\nosupersub  24 November 1817 Entries in Godwin Diary of "Frankenstein, Vol. Ill, p. 115" on 22 November and of "Frankenstein, p. 192, fin." on 24 November 1817 reveal that Godwin had finished his reading of a proof copy of \i 1818, \i0 the third volume of which had 192 pages.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri22\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 November 1817 In a letter from Marlow, "Mr Shelley presents his compt- to Mess-\super S\nosupersub  Lackington & begs to inform them that he has, as yet, recieved no proof of the preface or the title of frankenstein. ^Mr. S. suggests the advantage of announcing it by advertisement once before publication; as much expectation of its success has been excited in a particular circle, which such an announce might improve into a demand" (William St. Clair, "Her Father's Daughter," in \i 1818 Moser, \i0 page 254; also printed more accessibly in St. Clair, \i Godwins & Shelleys, \i0 page 554, n.25). (See 1 December 1817 below for at least one of the early "announces" of \i Frankenstein.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri24\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 December 1817 \i The Literary Panorama, and National Register, \i0 N.S., 7 (1 December 1817): 425, announced under "Literary Register" that "A work of imagination, entitled Frankenstein, or the modern Prometheus, in 3 vols. will be published towards the close of the present month." (See 1 June 1818 below for \i The Literary Panorama \i0 review of \i Frankenstein.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri17\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 3 December 1817 PBS from Marlow wrote to "Messrs. Lackington & Co." and "Inclosed ... a dedication which has been transmitted to me by the Author of Frankenstein, & which should be printed as is customary immediately subsequent to the Title. How soon do you propose to publish it?" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 572). (For this dedication to William Godwin, see transcription page 2 in this edition.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 16 December 1817 PBS from Marlow wrote to Thomas Moore to acknowledge what Moore had evidently deduced, that PBS and MWS had authored \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour, \i0 and to add that "Mrs. Shelley, tho' sorry that her secret is discovered, is exceedingly delighted to hear that you have derived any amusement from our book.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Let me say in her defence that the journal of the Six Weeks Tour was written before she was seventeen, & that she has another literary secret which I will in a short time ask you to \i keep \i0 in return for having \i discovered \i0 this" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 583).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri0\sb264\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 23 December 1817 PBS from Marlow wrote to "Messrs. Lackington & Co.": "let me have copies of Frankenstein as soon as they can be put in boards\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I think I said, that in addition to the six stipulated for, I wished nine to be sent to make in all fifteen, & the extra copies to be placed to mine or the author's account.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 On what day do you propose to publish it?" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 1,585). (PBS's \i "Ithinklsaid . \i0 . .nine . . .extra copies [my italics]"}\par }