{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1465\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1465\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1202 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 xcii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri24\sb646\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 helps reconcile this entry with the entries of 3 November 1817 [when PBS was billed for ten rather than nine additional copies of \i Frankenstein] \i0 and of 2 January 1818 [when he apparently repeated his request, but this time for "ten additional copies"].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb266\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 December 1817 The weekly London \i Observer \i0 (page 1, column 3) advertised that "On Monday, Dec. 29, 1817, will be published, in 3 vols, dedicated to William Goodwin \i [sic], \i0 a Work of Imagination, to be entitled, Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus" (partly quoted in Lyles, page 155). This advertisement was repeated on 4 January 1818 (page 4, column 1) and then replaced by one for "Just published \expndtw20 ..."\expndtw0  on 18 January 1818 (page 2, column 2). (Although the \i Observer \i0 recorded a publication date of 29 December 1817 for \i Frankenstein, \i0 there are four reasons to date its publication on 1 January 1818: the fact that the O \i bserver, \i0 a weekly, received on or before 27 December an earlier and possibly less exact advertisement; the imprint date of 1818; the arrival of the Shelleys' copies on 31 December 1817; and the advertisements in the \i Times, \i0 a daily, that announced the publication of \i Frankenstein \i0 on 1 January 1818\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 30 December 1817 and 1 January 1818 below.)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx290 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  30\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx290 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart30\pnindent288\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 December 1817 The London \i Times \i0 advertised that "On Thursday, Jan. 1,1818, will be published in 3 vols., price 16s.6d., a Work of Imagination, to be entitled Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus" (page 4, column 1). This advertisement was repeated on 31 December 1817 (page 4, column 1) and replaced by one for "This day is published ..." on 1 January 1818 (page 4, column I).\super 30}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx290 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  31\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx290 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart30\pnindent288\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 December 1817 MWS entered into her Marlow Journal that "Fran[kens]\super rein\nosupersub  comes"\super 31\nosupersub  \i (MWS Journal,!, \i0 189), most likely in the six copies in boards stipulated by the publishing agreement (see \i SC, \i0 V, 397) but lacking the additional copies in boards that PBS had requested: he seems to have forgotten that he ordered ten additional copies on or before 3 November 1817; he then repeated the request on 23 December 1817 but misremembered the ten copies as "nine"; then, after realizing or being informed that he had originally requested ten copies, he repeated his request on 2 January 1818, this time for "\ul ten\ul0  additional copies" (see these dates above and below).}\par \pard\plain\fs2\par{\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx163 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  1\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx163 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent163\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 January 1818 First London edition of \i Frankenstein \i0 was published\super 32\nosupersub  anonymously in three volumes in 12mo. by Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, & Jones in 500 copies: each copy (on wove paper watermarked "1816") bound in cloth-covered boards was priced at 16s.6d. According to the extant financial statement between PBS and Lackington (printed in \i SC, \i0 V, 397-398), six copies in boards were given to the author; sixteen in boards were sent to reviewers; eleven in boards were sent to copyright libraries (but see 15 January 1818 below); eight unbound copies were given as premiums to booksellers who took twenty-five copies for sale; the remaining 459 unbound copies (stitched or in quires) were discounted at 10s.6d. to booksellers, yielding \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 240.19.6, from which were deducted printing and other expenses of \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 115.18.0,\super 33\nosupersub  leaving a profit of \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 125.1.6, one-third of which (\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 41.13.10) was due to the author. It appears from the financial statement that ten of the remaining 459 copies were sold to the Shelleys, who were charged \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 6 or 12s./copy (apparently 10s.6d. for each unbound copy plus ls.6d. for the binding of each novel in three volumes of cloth-covered boards). If this extra charge of ls.6d. for the binding in boards (@6d./volume) was what commercial booksellers would also pay to bind the books in boards for their customers, then the booksellers (who also paid 10s.6d. for each unbound copy) would have earned 4s.6d. on each retail sale: 16s.6d. - (10s.6d.+ls.6d.) = 4s.6d. (In his statement of accounts, Lackington entered a similar expense of \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 2.9s.6d. for binding all 33 copies that he gave away: 594d. -*- 33 = 18d. [that is, ls.6d. for binding each set of a three-volume novel].)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri2\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx163 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  2\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri2\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx163 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent163\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 January 1818 PBS from Marlow wrote to "Mess\super r\nosupersub  Lackington & C\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'b0\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 " and requested "ten additional copies of Frankenstein to be sent, which may be placed to mine or to the Author's account as you please\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I am not at liberty to send any of these or of those already sent except to the personal friends of the author. None of these are officially connected with any of the Reviews, & if the any of them should express their opinions of the work to the public it would be solely through the Newspapers.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  I have no influence in any other quarter" \i (SC, \i0 V, 395; also printed in PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 590). (The underlined "ten" suggests that the nine copies in boards that PBS requested on 23 December 1817 had not yet arrived and that PBS either recalled or was informed that he had requested not nine}\par }