{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl575\margr1249\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn575\margrsxn1249\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7699\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9665 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xciii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri26\sb624\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 but ten additional copies back in early November 1817\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Shelley's account with Lackington on 3 November 1817 had been charged \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 6 for ten copies \i oi Frankenstein \i0 bound in boards [see \i SC, \i0 V, 397-398]\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 3 November and 23 December and 31 December 1817 above.)\super 34}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi360\ri14\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 On this same day, PBS from Marlow wrote to Walter Scott that "The Author has requested me to send you, as a slight tribute of high admiration & respect, the accompanying volumes. ^My own share in them consists simply in having superintended them through the press during the Author's absence. Perhaps it is the partial regard of friendship that persuades me that they are worthy of the attention of the celebrated person whom I have at present the honour to address" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 590). (For Scott's review \i oi Frankenstein \i0 and for MWS's response, see 20 March/1 April and 14 June 1818 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi367\ri26\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 On this same day, PBS from Marlow wrote to his publisher Charles Oilier that "I send a copy of Frankenstein to be bound for me in some neat & appropriate binding. . . . ^I should like to hear your opinion of Frankenstein" \i (SQV, \i0 393).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri24\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 12 January 1818 Claire Clairmont wrote to Byron that "Mary has just published her first work a novel called Frankenstein or, the Modern Prometheus. It is a most wonderful performance full of genius & the fiction is of so continued and extraordinary a kind as no one would imagine <to belong to> could have been written by so young a person" \i (Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 111).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri24\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15 January 1818 PBS in Marlow wrote to his publisher Charles Oilier in London and asked "Do you hear any thing said of Frankenstein?" \i (SC, \i0 V, 446; also printed in PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 593).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi353\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 According to the register books at Stationers' Hall, only one copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 was registered on this date. Because Lackington's statement of account with PBS indicated that eleven copies were "Claimed under Copy Right" for the copyright libraries (see \i SC, \i0 V, 397), it seems that someone, perhaps even Lackington, profited by having ten additional bound copies for sale.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li26\fi0\ri19\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 17 January 1818 Claire Clairmont in her Marlow Journal entered that "In the Evening write part of a Critiscism \i [sic] \i0 on Frankenstein" \i (SC, \i0 V, 451), but there is no other record of what she wrote.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [PFebruary 1818] PBS at some undetermined time wrote a review of \i Frankenstein \i0 that was not published until 10 November 1832 (see that date below). (A now incomplete holograph draft of this review is in the Library of Congress Shelley notebook\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see PBS \i Prose, \i0 I, 282-284 and 489-492.) In the published review PBS called \i Frankenstein \i0 "one of the most original and complete productions of the day," and he carefully avoided calling the "Being" a "monster" (see "Naming in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks" in the Introduction).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi348\ri22\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is possible that MWS copied PBS's review on 21 and/or 23 February 1818: "Copy S's critique on [Peacock's] Rhododaphne" is an entry on 20 February, but "Copy S's critique" on 21 February and "Finish copying S's critique" on 23 February may refer to PBS's review of \i Frankenstein \i0 as well as his review of \i Rhododaphne.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri14\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 20 February 1818 By this date (when the February 1818 \i Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine \i0 was published in Edinburgh), the "To Correspondents" preliminaries announced that "The Criticism on 'Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus,' is received." (This information on Scott's forthcoming review [see 20 March/1 April 1818 below] would have been available to the Shelleys by 28 February 1818, the publication date of the February 1818 \i Blackwood's \i0 in London.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 25 February 1818 PBS's friend Thomas Jefferson Hogg had earlier sent a copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 to John Frank Newton, who then returned the novel with a conjecture about its author. Hogg then drafted a letter in which he disabused Newton with the following remarks: "The Novel w\super ch\nosupersub you returned has . . . afforded an opportunity for . . . conjecture when you guess . . .that the name of the author is Shelley you guess rightly but when you would prefix the words Percy Bysshe the infirmity of our nature interposes between you \i &c \i0 the truth w\super 0\nosupersub '\super 1\nosupersub  whispers Mary In plain terms Frankenstein \expndtw37 ...\expndtw0  is written by M\super rs\nosupersub  Shelley & is th fore estimable . . . not for its own sake alone but as a present pledge ... of future excellence.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  That This is a profound secret & no more to be divulged without}\par }