{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl556\margr1273\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn556\margrsxn1273\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7776\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9742 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xcv}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi358\ri17\sb583\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The Monthly Review\i0 ,N.S., 85 (April 1818): 439, reviewed \i Frankenstein \i0 in a short paragraph as "An uncouth story, in the taste of the German novelists, trenching in some degree on delicacy, setting probability at defiance, and leading to no conclusion either moral or philosophical. In some passages, the writer appears to favour the doctrines of materialism: but a serious examination is scarcely necessary for so excentric a vagary of the imagination as this tale presents."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri24\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 24 April 1818 Leigh Hunt from London concluded a letter to PBS in Italy that "Frankenstein is in request as usual" (SC, VI, \i 596; \i0 also printed in \i Hunt Correspondence, \i0 I, 119), possibly referring to his own personal copy.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri17\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 April 1818 PBS from Milan wrote to Byron in Venice that he was bringing a "packet of books" for Byron: "I am commissioned by an old friend of yours to convey Frankenstein to you, \i &c \i0 to request that if you conjecture the name of the author that you will regard it as a secret. In fact it is M\super rs\nosupersub  S's. It has met with considerable success in England, but she bids me say \super c\nosupersub that she . . . would regard your approbation as a more flattering testimony of its' merit'" (SQ VI, 575; also printed in PBS \i Letters, \i0 II, 13).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri14\sb250\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 4 May 1818 PBS's cousin Charlotte Grove recorded in her diary that "Bysshe's novel of Prometheus came" \i (Grove Diaries, \i0 pages 137 and 139 n.). (For an explanation of why the anonymously published \i Frankenstein \i0 had}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb26\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 been delayed and why it might have been judged PBS's, see Hawkins, pages 112-113.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri17\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 9 May 1818 MWS and PBS arrived in Leghorn, met Maria and John Gisborne, and apparently gave them then or shortly thereafter a copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 (see 21 June 1818 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri5\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 30 May 1818 Peacock from Marlow wrote to PBS in Italy that "Since I wrote last I have received a Number of Constable's \i Edinburgh Magazine, \i0 containing a notice of \i Frankenstein, \i0 very favourable, though not so much so as that in \i Blackwood's, \i0 and not so good in any respect. It is not worth postage, but I will include it in the parcel" \i (Peacock Works, \i0 VIII, 192). (For this \i Edinburgh Magazine \i0 review [which Peacock planned to ship to the Shelleys in Italy], see [?] March 1818 above. Peacock's remarks suggest that MWS already knew about Walter Scott's review in \i Blackwood's \i0 and that he may have even forwarded that review to the Shelleys when he "wrote last"; according to MWS's letter to Scott on 14 June 1818, she received his review "from the publisher [Lackington] of Frankenstein," but it is possible that Peacock was the go-between\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 71; see also 14 June 1818 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri12\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 June 1818 \i The Literary Panorama, and National Register, \i0 N.S., 8 (1 June 1818): 411-414, reviewed \i Frankenstein \i0 as " a feeble imitation of one that was very popular in its day,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 the St. Leon of Mr. Godwin. It exhibits many characteristics of the school whence it proceeds; and occasionally puts forth indications of talent; but we have been very much disappointed in the perusal of it, from our expectations having been raised too high beforehand by injudicious praises; and it exhibits a strong tendency towards \i materialism." \i0 In his final paragraph, the reviewer remarked that "We have heard that this work is written by Mr. Shelley; but should be disposed to attribute it to even a less experienced writer than he is. In fact we have some idea that it is the production of a daughter of a celebrated living novelist."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri5\sb252\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 7 June 1818 Leigh Hunt's \i Examiner \i0 announced that "The succeeding [for 21 June 1818] Notice will be on \i Frankenstein" \i0 (page 361), but the \i Examiner \i0 for 30 August 1818 announced that these "Literary Notices were not resumed" (page 552). (Peck argued that PBS's review of \i Frankenstein\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see [PFebruary 1818] above\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 was the one Hunt intended to publish, but that argument is called into question by Hunt's letter to MWS of [P25-27] July 1819\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see that date below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li24\fi0\ri0\sb278\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 12 June 1818      John Wilson Croker reviewed \i Frankenstein \i0 in the \i Quarterly Review \i0 18 (January 1818): 379-}\par }