{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl570\margr1264\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn570\margrsxn1264\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7699\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9665 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xcix}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri12\sb612\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [P25-27] July 1819 Leigh Hunt in London wrote to MWS in Leghorn that "That exquisite passage about the cottagers [the De Laceys] shews what you could do. Besides, to tell you the truth, I want an opportunity of speaking about your writings, having delayed criticising your novel so long for want of well knowing how to handle it, that I know not what to be<\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 > at in order to shew you what I really feel. This is the whole mystery, I assure you,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 if ever you have a thought about it,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  & not my old thief of a friend, delay, however he mi\ul ght\ul0  have insisted on having a hand in the matter too" \i (SC, \i0 VI, 845; also printed in \i Hunt Correspondence, \i0 1,133). (These remarks, which address Hunt's failure to review \i Frankenstein \i0 in the \i Examiner, \i0 suggest that PBS's review of \i Frankenstein \i0 was not intended for the \i Examiner\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see [PFebruary 1818] and 7 June 1818 above as well as 10 November 1832 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri5\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 5 October 1819 MWS from Florence wrote to Maria Gisborne in Leghorn, asking her to send a copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 in a parcel of books to "Mrs. Mason" (Lady Mount Cashell) in Pisa (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 110). (This request and the remainder of the letter suggest that MWS had left behind one or more copies of \i Frankenstein \i0 [together with other books] in Leghorn, when the Shelleys departed for Florence on 30 September 1819.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri22\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [21] July 1821 First translation of MWS's novel: \i Frankenstein, ou le Prometbee moderne, \i0 traduit de 1'anglais par J. S. [Jules Saladin], 3 vols. (Paris: Correard, 1821). (This translation is cited by Palacio, page 652; the date is to be found in \i Bibliograpbie de la France \i0 10 [1821]: 383-384.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb286\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 8 July 1822      PBS drowned after his boat sank in the Gulf of Spezia.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb264\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 19 October 1822 MWS recalled in her Genoa Journal that "incapacity & timidity always prevented my mingling in the nightly conversations of Diodati\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 they were as it were entirely tete-a-tete between my Shelley & Albe [Byron]" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 II, 439), thereby supporting MWS's remark in the \i 1831 \i0 Introduction that "Many and long were the conversations between Lord Byron and Shelley, to which I was a devout but nearly silent listener" (page ix).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri14\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18 February 1823 William Godwin from London wrote to MWS in Albaro that "Your talents are truly extraordinary. 'Frankenstein\super 5\nosupersub  is universally known, and, though it can never be a book for vulgar reading, is everywhere respected. It is the most wonderful work to have been written at twenty years of age that I ever heard of" \i (Shelley and Mary, \i0 IV, 915).\super 41\nosupersub  (By "written at twenty years of age," Godwin apparently meant published at that age: MWS began \i Frankenstein \i0 when she was eighteen; she finished the Fair Copy of the novel when she was nineteen; but, technically, she appears to have made her last proof additions to the novel in October 1817, by which time she had turned twenty.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?July] 1823 MWS presented her personal and corrected copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 to a Mrs. Thomas in Genoa, inscribed "Mrs. Thomas / From her friend- the Author / Mary Shelley." (Mrs. Thomas followed MWS's inscription with "being the copy she made her corrections, and additions in, for the Second Edition of\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Genoa, 1823.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 " [see photofacsimile of the inscribed half-title page in \i\expndtw13 1818\expndtw0  Rieger, \i0 page 1; see also page xxii for the full text of Mrs. Thomas's later remarks in this edition now housed at the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York City].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22 July 1823 William Godwin from London wrote to MWS (who was preparing to leave Italy at this time) that "It is a curious circumstance that a play is just announced, to be performed at the English Opera House in the Strand next Monday, entitled, Presumption, or the Fate of Frankenstein. I know not whether it will succeed. If it does, it will be some sort of feather in the cap of the author of the novel, a recommendation in your future negociacions with booksellers" (quoted in Forry, page 3; see 28 July 1823 below). (This and other \i Frankenstein \i0 plays did succeed in 1823, resulting in new attention to MWS when she returned to England on 25 August 1823\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see especially theatrical news in the periodical press, July through October 1823.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 July 1823       Richard Brinsley Peake's \i Presumption; or, The Fate of Frankenstein \i0 opened at the Lyceum}\par }