{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl632\margr808\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn8403\margrsxn808\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw1226\colsr751\colno2\colw720 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 cvn}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn632\margrsxn808\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi612\ri408\sb622\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 9. When referring to MWS's Journal, I preface it with the place where she made the entry: e.g., Geneva Journal means she made the entry while residing in Geneva; Genoa Journal, in Genoa. The reader is reminded that there were not discrete Journals for each locale.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri406\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  10.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri406\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 This and other evidence suggests that there was in fact an ur-text and that MWS did not turn from writing a "story" to writing a "book" or "novel" before August 1816\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see also note 12 below as well as "Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text" in Introduction.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri403\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  11.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri403\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Most intriguing here is that Charles Clairmont's reference to "Ingolstat" may have been in response to MWS's now lost letter of 28 June that he had recently received. According to Charles, MWS in that letter mentioned that PBS and Byron were still on their tour around Lake Geneva (see \i Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 62); it is also possible that she wrote to him that not only was she writing a "story" during their absence but also that part of it would be set in Ingolstadt. If that were the case, then we could date the particulars of the ur-text with greater accuracy. Alas, this is one of the countless places in literary history where a single but now lost document could shed considerable light.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri396\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  12.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri396\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 David Ketterer in "Draft" (page 264, n.26) offers one hypothesis about the summer writing activity only to emend it (or to give the word "translate" yet additional meanings) in the galleys of a forthcoming 1997 article ("Insert"). In both instances, he relies on nine MWS Journal entries (such as "Write & read \expndtw34 ...\expndtw0  I translate in the evening" and "Write and Translate" and "Write my story and translate") between 7 and 16 August 1816 to mean that MWS was simultaneously (1) writing new parts of her novel and (2) "translating" or "transferring" her ur-text into \i either \i0 Notebook A \i or \i0 B (a complication that Ketterer introduces that is not warranted by the manuscript evidence). Such a reading of "translate," while possible, seems with the word "write" too cumbersome to be persuasive, especially since the nine entries that indicate "translate" more likely meant that MWS was translating (perhaps as an exercise) the Tacitus that PBS began to read on 6 August and finished on 17 August, dates that quite nicely frame and explain MWS's "translate" entries\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 123-126. For another unfortunate confusion about the word "translate," see note 28 below. See also "Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text" in the Introduction.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri389\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  13.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri389\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 I should state here, however, that Betty T. Bennett disagrees with my reading of "work" and judges that MWS would not consider such housework as worth mentioning in her Journal. If Bennett is right, then the exact meaning of "work" still eludes us.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri394\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  14.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri394\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 MWS's reading list for 1816 confirms that she read "Introduction to Davy's Chemistry" (MWS \i Journals, \i0 I, \i 96), \i0 but the actual book could have been either Davy's \i Elements of Chemical Philosophy, \i0 Part I, Vol. I (London: J. Johnson and Co., 1812) that PBS purchased in 1812 (see PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 319) or possibly Davy's \i A Discourse, Introductory to A Course of Lectures on Chemistry \i0 (London: Sold at the House of the Royal Institution, 1802), the latter judged more likely by Crouch, pages 35-44. However, MWS's reference to "potassium & Boron" (see pages 34-35 in this edition), two elements not isolated until 1807 and 1808 according to \i 1818 Crook, \i0 28n., suggests that MWS was acquainted with more than the 1802 \i Discourse.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri396\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  15.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri396\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 \'95\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0  For an explanation of the "mystery " surrounding the first part of this letter, see Nora Crook's review of MWS \i Letters \i0 in \i Keats-Shelley Review 7 \i0 (1992): 149, n.13.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri386\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  16.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri386\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There is, of course, one more possibility: that MWS revised and shortened the "very long" Ch. [4] not long after she "finished" it on 5 December 1816.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri382\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  17.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri382\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 That is, pages 124-203 in Notebook B plus the two pages (originally paginated 183-184) that were torn out of Notebook B (see Quiring Charts for Quire [IV] in Notebook B and/or see pages 600-603 in this edition).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri379\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  18.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri379\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There are three other reasons to favor the hypothesis that MWS made the re-transcription before 3 August 1817: (1) the amateurish cutting of the edges makes it unlikely that a printer or even a printer's assistant made the cuts in the period between late August and early November; (2) the fact that only PBS pages were damaged and replaced supports the hypothesis that the re-transcription preceded sending the notebooks to Oilier; and (3) the paper MWS used for the re-transcription was identical to the paper she used for her transcription of PBS's oral translation of Aeschylus's \i Prometheus Bound \i0 on 13 July 1817 in Marlow (see Chronology for that date as well as Barker-Benfield, \i Guitar, \i0 pages 88-89; see also the information on these substitute pages in my Introduction, page xlvii; finally, see note 28 below).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri365\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  19.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi518\ri365\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1018 \f1\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent500\pnf1{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 A publisher at this time usually entered into one of three kinds of publishing agreements: (1) he could purchase the copyright and then publish the work at his own expense, paying for the copyright and all printing and advertising expenses out of the income; (2) he could contract with the author for half (or one-third or one-quarter) profits that were determined after paying all expenses for printing, advertising, and circulating the book; (3) he could publish}\par }