{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1479\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1479\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1193 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 cviii\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-4\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb631\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 by commission on the author's own account, that is, arrange all or most details of printing, advertising, and circulating the book (the expenses for which would be paid by the author), receive all income from sales, and then deduct a commission (usually 10%) for his marketing labours. PBS published most of his works on commission through his publishers Charles and James Oilier\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see Robinson, "Oilier."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri22\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  20.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri22\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 See Edward Baldwin [William Godwin], T/7^ \i Pantheon: or Ancient History ofthe Gods of Greece and Rome. For the Use of Schools, and Young Persons of Both Sexes, \i0 4th ed. (London: Printed for M. J. Godwin, at the Juvenile Library, 1814), pages 74-80.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  21.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The plural "Mss." \expndtw10 (in\expndtw0  contrast to "manuscript" earlier in the letter and to "MS." in the letter to Hunt on the same day) may refer specifically to the [Peleven] separate Fair-Copy Notebooks that PBS was asking Oilier to read.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  22.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For information on the Robinson publishing family, see An Old Bookseller, "Letters to My Son at Rome [Letters IX and X]: Notice of the Robinsons," in \i The Aldine Magazine \i0 I (1838/39): 132-135 and 156-157.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  23.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Although the Fair Copy for this passage is not extant, the similarity in the surrounding passages between the Draft text and \i 1818 \i0 text suggest that MWS rather than PBS transcribed the Draft into the Fair Copy. Consequently, if PBS did author the lines in question, he most likely did it in the proof stage. Compare these lines to PBS's famous remark, made at approximately the same time in the draft notebook for \i Laon and Cythna, \i0 about a person giving "a faithful history of his being from the earliest epochs of his recollection," about men beholding "thier own recollections . . . thier shadowy hopes & fears," about thought being "like a river whose rapid & perpetual stream flows outwards" from the "caverns of the mind" (see complete transcription of this passage in Tokoo, pages 162-165).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi713\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There is a slight possibility that these proofs had nothing to do with \i Frankenstein; \i0 that is, MWS might have been referring to "abruptnesses" in the proofs of \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour, \i0 the first half ("journal of our travels") of which \expndtw-2 she appears to have fair copied from [ ? 6] through [ ? 13] or [ ? 17] August 1817; but it is more likely that no proofs of \i History \i0\expndtw0 were forthcoming until after 12 October 1817 when MWS fair copied the second half ("letters from Geneva") \i oiHistory of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour \i0 (see Chronology for 6-17 August and for 10-12 October 1817). If this "carte blanche" permission was given to PBS for \i Frankenstein, \i0 it should be stressed that it applied only to this proof, perhaps a single gathering of 24 pages.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li497\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  24.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li497\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For the full name of the printer, consult Todd, page 123.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  25.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is also possible that these "proofs" referred to MWS and PBS's collaborative \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3\nosupersub  Tour, \i0 the first half of which may have been going through the press at this time (see Chronology for 28 September 1817).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  26.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For the latest information on Claire Clairmont's fiction at this time, see \i Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 30-33, 92, and 111-112 (n.l)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see also \i Clairmont Journals, \i0 pages 40, 43-44, \i 75, 77.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  27.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 See also Godwin Diary for that date ("Gig w. Mary; attendant Shelley & Peacock; through Wycombe, to Hampden"), which suggests that PBS and Peacock may have accompanied the two-person gig, possibly on foot, for some or all of this excursion.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri5\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  28.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri5\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It should be emphasized that "translate F." here does not mean that MWS re-transcribed the PBS Fair Copy at this time. Ketterer made that error in his "Draft" article (pages 241-242, n.ll), only to disabuse himself of it in his forthcoming "Insert" article (page 13, n. 2, in the galley stage that he provided me). It is much more likely that MWS re-transcribed the damaged PBS fair copy no later than 3 August, when PBS submitted the Fair-Copy Notebooks of his anonymous "friend" to the publisher Charles Oilier (who could have recognized PBS's distinctive hand and wondered how it got on this manuscript of a "friend")\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 for more information on this re-transcription, see Chronology for [?10-13] May and for 3 August 1817.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  29.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is possible but unlikely that all of \i Frankenstein \i0 was printed by 3 November: on 28 October 1817 there were still six gatherings in Volume III to print and/or to see through proofs; and the first evidence for a three-volume novel ready to be read in a proof copy is not until 22 November 1817 (see Chronology for these dates).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  30.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Other advertisements for \i Frankenstein \i0 in the \i Times, Morning Chronicle, \i0 and elsewhere are not recorded in this Chronology, except for what appear to be the last advertisements for \i\expndtw13 1818\expndtw0  \i0 (see 1, 2 July and 15, 26 August 1818 in this  Chronology).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  31.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Strictly speaking, the manuscript of this Journal entry reads more like "Fran\super 1211\nosupersub  comes" (the reading given in \i SC, \i0 V, 471, n.5), but it is clearly a standard albeit slightly miswritten abbreviated form for "Frankenstein."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  32.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi494\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1037 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart24\pnindent541\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 This official publication date (taken from the \i Times \i0 rather than the \i Observer\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see Chronology above for 28 and for 30 December 1817) needs emphasis here in order to counteract the frequent misdating of \i Frankenstein's}\par }