{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw14443\paperh14213\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn14443\pghsxn14213\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1495\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx2681 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 ex\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri5\sb677\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  47.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri5\sb677\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart47\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Using parallel columns to discredit Medwin, Hobhouse first quoted Medwin's Byron as having said "'My real Vampyre I gave at the end of Mazeppa, something in the same way that I told it one night at Diodati, when Monk Lewis and Shelley and his wife were present. The latter sketched on that occasion the outline of her Pygmalion story, the modern Prometheus'\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 p. 149"; Hobhouse then responded with "The conversation said to have been held at Diodati is fictitious.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 With the exception of Mr. Lewis, no one told a tale, and Mrs. Shelley never saw the late Mr. Lewis in her life. The Preface to Frankenstein shows that that story was invented \i before \i0 lord Byron's and Mr. Shelley's tour on the Lake, and Mr. Lewis did not arrive at Diodati till some time \i after" \i0 (page 28). When Hobhouse quoted from page 149 of the 2d ed. of Medwin's \i Conversations, \i0 he omitted Byron's purported remark after "'the modern Prometheus'"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 namely, "the making of a man (which a lady who had read it afterwards asked Sir Humphry Davy, to his great astonishment, if he could do . . .)." Byron's purported remarks are on pages 101-102 of the 1824 first edition of Medwin's \i Conversations.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1985\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  48.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1985\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart47\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Forry, pages 121-122, lists Paris productions of six more adaptations of \i Frankenstein \i0 in 1826.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  49.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart47\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Because of this confusing arrangement, some copies of Standard Novels #9 have been divided and rebound. Such is the case with a copy in Cambridge University Library, which caused Nora Crook to claim (incorrectly) that Standard Novels #9 included only \i Frankenstein \i0 and that a half-title announcing Volume I of \i The Ghost-Seer \i0 was erroneous (see \i 1818 Crook, \i0 page \b 175n.).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  50.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart47\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Significant "alterations" made in \i 1831 \i0 include the following: Elizabeth's transformation from a cousin to a foundling having no blood relation to Victor; a new chapter to accommodate a much longer exposition about Victor's childhood; and a more explicit and earlier introduction of the doppelganger theme when Victor alludes to Aristophanes' myth of the circular and then divided primal human beings in Plato's \i Symposium \i0 (Walton records in the revised Letter IV the following remarks by Victor: " 'I agree with you,' replied the stranger; 'we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 such a friend ought to be\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend [Clerval], the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship'" [page 16].)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  51.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li1488\fi497\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart47\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 This letter is dated [?February-10 March 1831] in MWS \i Letters \i0 because it seems to anticipate the not-yet-contracted-for \i 1831 \i0 edition in which MWS added an "Introduction" to precede the "Preface"of \i 1818. \i0 The new discovery of the purported \i 182 6 \i0 edition (the re-issue by Colburn on 4 April 1826) seemed to corroborate the dating because MWS's desire for a new "\ul real\ul0 " edition could have been a reference to the "unreal" \i 1826 \i0 edition (or so Nora Crook and I reasoned in international faxes, email, and telephone conversations in December 1995\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see \i 1818 Crook, \i0 page xcviii and n.31). But the specifics of the letter (where MWS wanted to add \i to \i0 the "Introduction"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and only \i 1831 \i0 had an "Introduction"; and where she inquired about \i Frankenstein \i0 going to \i\super u\nosupersub the \i0 press again"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 a likely reference to the 1832 stereotyped re\-issue that did not involve a resetting of any pages of the \i 1831 \i0 edition) caused me to rethink the dating of this letter. The fact that Colburn and Bentley dissolved their partnership in September 1832 does not bear on the 1833 date I have assigned to the letter\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 MWS asked Oilier about Colburn and Bentley in a later letter of 11 February 1833, which is in fact one of two letters that seem to frame the letter I have dated [?1-10 February 1833]: on 31 January 1833 MWS asked Oilier to "read" the manuscript of Volume I of \i Lodore \i0 "with as little delay as is practicable"; she concluded her [?1-}\par \pard\plain\fs2\par{\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1502\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1754 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  10\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1502\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1754 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent252\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 February] letter with the P.S. "Do tell me what you have done about the MS. sent you to read"; and she concluded}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi1502\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1754 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-10\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  11\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi1502\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx1754 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent252\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-10\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 February with "When shall I hear from you on the other subject [that is, the fate of \i Lodore, \i0 which Bentley eventually U                           accepted for publication] ?"}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1985\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx2525 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 52.{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }For the rest of this list of dramatizations up through 1986, see Forry, pages 122-126.}\par }