{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1172\margr655\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1172\margrsxn655\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xii       \i0\scaps The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri29\sb619\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 the Photographic Department of the Bodleian Library (for photographing the manuscripts) and to Debbie Handy from Garland Publishing: only after comparing Garland's first set of 9 x 12 prints with the manuscripts in the Bodleian Library in January 1995 did I realize that their cropped edges and washed-out details meant that an entire new set of 8V\sub 2\nosupersub  x 11 prints were needed, and Debbie Handy handled all aspects of that replacement.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi353\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The "sinews and muscles" of this edition have been strengthened by the assistance of many individuals, especially George Miller, Chair of the English Department at the University of Delaware, who endured looking at many configurations of my pages as I attempted to get them looking right. The staff of the University of Delaware Library were always accommodating, and I particularly wish to thank Susan Byrnteson (Director of Libraries), Timothy D. Murray and his excellent staff in Special Collections, and all of the staff of Interlibrary Loan who obtained for me early nineteenth-century newspapers in film as well as in bound volumes. Anna Lou Ashby of The Pierpont Morgan Library was very helpful to me on a number of occasions, as were Doucet Devin Fisher and Stephen Wagner of The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley & His Circle at the New York Public Library. Others who made large and small contributions include Dorothy A. Carroll, Pamela Clemit, Veronica M. Eid, Paula R. Feldman, Renee Fisher, Nancy Moore Goslee, Hilda and John Hadland, William Hodges and the staff of Duke Humfrey's Library at the Bodleian Library, Nicholas A. Joukovsky, David Ketterer, Margaret Kulis, Danielle McClellan, Anne K. Mellor, Jeanne Moskal, Hershel Parker, Helene Dworzan Reiman, Darlene A. Reynolds, Linda H. Russell, William St. Clair, Wilma Slaight, Johanna M. Smith, Marion Kingston Stocking (as always), and JefferyVail.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi362\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Special mention must be made of thirteen professional colleagues who in June and July 1996 agreed to read antepenultimate versions of my Introduction and of my \i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology. All of them made valuable suggestions, corrections, and alterations, almost all of which were singular (not repeated by the other readers) and almost all of which I adopted. I have truly benefited from these "collaborators," these generous scholars who have "labored with" and on behalf of me: Terry Belanger, Bruce Barker-Benfield, Betty T. Bennett (with whom I had collaborated on earlier books), Nora Crook, Stuart Curran, Doucet Devin Fischer, Neil Fraistat, Steven E. Jones, Jerome J. McGann, Mary A. Quinn, Donald H. Reiman, Peter S. Shillingsburg, and Emily W. Sunstein. It should come as no surprise that many of these generous people have also published very useful books and editions with Garland Publishing, Inc., which I wish to thank for the support they have given me in this enterprise. Specifically, I thank from the New York offices, Audrey Leung, Bruce Lyons, John Shea (who worked many long hours on my behalf), and my editor Elspeth Hart (who has seen many of these "Bodleian" volumes through the press). Those who have worked with Elspeth know how wonderful she is\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 her wit and wisdom, her patience and generosity are indeed incomparable.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi350\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 One of my "collaborators" named above must be singled out: Nora Crook (the editor of another 1996 \i Frankenstein) \i0 and I exchanged volumes of information over the Atlantic by phone, fax, and e-mail between December 1995 and August 1996. Financial support for these transmissions came from the English Department of the University of Delaware. The English Department and Garland Publishing also underwrote many more phone calls between Delaware and the Bodleian Library in the period March-August 1996. For other financial support during my two \i Frankenstein \i0 years, I wish to thank the University of Delaware's Office of the Vice Provost for Research, Office of International Programs, and College of Arts and Science\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 as well as the National Endowment for the Humanities. And for their support of scholarship in the English Romantics, I wish to acknowledge the efforts of Garland Publishing and of The Johns Hopkins University Press\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 a glance at the "Short Titles" will evidence how much both publishers have contributed to studies in the Shelleys and their Circle during the past twenty years.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi360\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 My first and final debts are to my dedicatees. I have already named my editor Elspeth Hart, and I wish here to thank my wife Peggy for all of her support and patience during a very long gestation period: needless to say, I missed my delivery date by more than a few days or even a few months. We can only hope that this edition will go forth and prosper and make the sacrifices worthwhile.}\par }