{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f18\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f20\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f22\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f24\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f26\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f30\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f32\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl486\margr1340\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn486\margrsxn1340\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri36\sb0\sa0\sl-442\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn8\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs56 Short Titles}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb974\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The first group of short titles below provide a convenient shorthand by which to distinguish various texts and editions of \i Frankenstein \i0 from each other, and all of the titles survey the scholarship that has contributed to this edition. For many other important books and articles on Mary Shelley, \i Frankenstein, \i0 and her other works, consult the bibliographies published separately (e.g., Lyles), annually (e.g., in the \i Keats-Shelley Journal), \i0 or electronically (e.g.-, the MLA International Bibliography on CD-ROM). For reviews of \i Frankenstein \i0 published between 1818 and 1832, see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb264\sa0\tx2890 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1816-17\loch\f17\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\loch\f0\cchs0 Draft of \i Frankenstein \i0 (in 2 volumes): as it survives in Notebooks A and B in}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2892\fi0\ri0\sb17\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Bodleian Dep. c. 477/1 and c. 534/1; and/or as edited in \i 1816-17 Robinson.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb254\sa0\sl-247\slmult0\tx2897 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1816-17 Robinson\loch\f17\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\loch\f0\cchs0 Charles E. Robinson. \i The \i0 Frankenstein \i Notebooks: A Facsimile Edition of Mary}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2887\fi0\ri19\sb0\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Shelley's Manuscript Novel, 1816-17 (with alterations in the hand of Percy Bysshe Shelley) as it survives in Draft and Fair Copy deposited by Lord Abinger in the Bodleian Library, Oxford (Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep. c. 534/1-2). \i0 Parts One and Two. (Manuscripts of the Younger Romantics, Volume IX.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1996.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\tx2887 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1817{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0 Fair Copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 (in 3 volumes): as it survives in Notebooks CI and C2}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2892\fi0\ri0\sb12\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 in Bodleian Dep. c. 534/2; and/or as edited in \i 1816-17 Robinson.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\tx2887 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus. \i0 3 vols. London: Lackington, Hughes,}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2887\fi0\ri0\sb17\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Harding, Mavor, & Jones, 1818.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb250\sa0\sl-247\slmult0\tx2892 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Butler\loch\f17\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\loch\f0\cchs0 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. \i Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus: The 1818}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2890\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Text. \i0 Ed. Marilyn Butler. London: William Pickering, 1993. [Reprinted in paper as one of "The World's Classics," Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994. Both the original and the reprint have an appendix in which Butler prints "The Third Edition (1831): Substantive Changes" together with "Collation of the Texts of 1818 and 1831."]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb245\sa0\sl-247\slmult0\tx2897 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Crook\loch\f17\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\loch\f0\cchs0 Mary Shelley. \i Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus. \i0 Ed. Nora Crook.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2894\fi0\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 (Volume 1 of \i The Novels and Selected Works of Mary Shelley, \i0 8 vols., ed. Nora Crook, with an Introduction by Betty T. Bennett.) London: William Pickering, 1996. [Crook provides four valuable textual notes: "Endnotes: Textual Variants" (pages 182-227), in which she prints MWS's autograph corrections in \i 1818 Thomas \i0 and the substantive variants in \i 1823 \i0 and \i 1831; \i0 "A Note on Spelling Variants in \i 1818, 1823 \i0 and \i 1831" \i0 (page 228); "Unauthorized Variants" (page}\par }