{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl424\margr1052\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn8260\margrsxn1052\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw1195\colsr682\colno2\colw720 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb5\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Short Titles}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 xvu}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn424\margrsxn1388\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 {\pard\plain \sb624\sa0\sl-1\slmult0\fs2\par}\sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn424\margrsxn1388\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw2143\colsr730\colno2\colw7224 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li14\fi0\ri0\sb1507\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1818 Wolf-2}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb1013\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1823}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb770\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [1826]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb516\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1831}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb1771\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1831Hindle}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb1759\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1831 Joseph}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb1258\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1831 Smith}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb602\sa0\sl-751\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Angeli Barker-Benfield, \i Guitar}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri34\sb0\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 process) led to a number of errors in the text, most resulting from severe cropping when the pages were rearranged. For the fourteen places where \i 1818 Wolf-1 \i0 misrepresents the \i 1818 \i0 text and/or introduces new errors, see the footnotes on transcription pages 2, 79,105,163, 253,449, 479, 519, 587 (and 715), 653 (and 757) in \i 1816-17 Robinson.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri31\sb250\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The Essential Frankenstein. \i0 Written and Edited by Leonard Wolf. Including the Complete Novel by Mary Shelley. New York: Penguin Books USA Inc. (A Plume Book), 1993. [This edition, a resetting of the text of the \i 1818 \i0 photofacsimile in \i 1818 Wolf-1, \i0 also carries over the errors from that earlier edition.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri29\sb245\sa0\sl-252\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. \i Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus. \i0 A New Edition. 2 vols. London: G. and W. B. Whittaker, 1823. [A photofacsimile of this edition was published by Oxford: Woodstock Books, 1993.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri34\sb247\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Most likely a Henry Colburn re-issue of remaining copies of \i 1823 \i0 without even a new title page.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri29\sb247\sa0\sl-250\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus. \i0 By the Author of \i The Last Man, Perkin Warbeck, &c. &c. \i0 Revised, Corrected, and Illustrated with a New Introduction, by the Author. London: Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley (Bell and Bradfute, Edinburgh; and Gumming, Dublin), 1831. [The title page is preceded by an engraved title page: Mary W. Shelley. \i Frankenstein. \i0 London: Colburn and Bentley, 1831. A photofacsimile of this engraved title page may be seen in \i 1818 Crook, \i0 page 173.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri17\sb250\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Shelley. \i Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus. \i0 Ed. Maurice Hindle. London: Penguin Books, 1992. [This hybrid edition, an expansion of Hindle's Penguin edition of 1985, prints \i 1831 \i0 but divides it by means of the volumes and chapters of \i 1818; \i0 it also includes "Appendix A: Select Collation of the Texts of 1831 and 1818," in which Hindle also prints "a selection of significant revisions made by Percy Shelley at MS stage, which Mary Shelley adopted," but the reader is reminded that not all of Hindle's identifications of PBS's hand are correct.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb252\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. \i Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus. \i0 Ed. M. K. Joseph. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969. [Reprinted in paper as one of "The World's Classics," London: Oxford University Press, 1980. Joseph in an appendix was one of the first to address "The Composition \i oi Frankenstein." \i0 See \i 1818 Crook \i0 above for Joseph introducing errors into the \i 1831 \i0 text.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri22\sb247\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mary Shelley. \i Frankenstein: Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary Critical Perspectives. \i0 Ed. Johanna M. Smith. (Case Studies in Contemporary Criticism.) Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press, 1992.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri29\sb254\sa0\sl-252\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Helen Rossetti Angeli. \i Shelley and His Friends in Italy. \i0 London: Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1911.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri0\sb245\sa0\sl-247\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 B. C. Barker-Benfield. \i Shelley's Guitar: An exhibition of manuscripts, first editions and relics, to mark the Bicentenary of the birth of Percy Bysshe Shelley, 17921 1992. \i0 Oxford: Bodleian Library, 1992.}\par }