{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl586\margr1238\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn586\margrsxn1238\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7670\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9641 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xxix}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri24\sb614\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 1818 \i0 first edition (Volume and Chapter numbers may be found at the top of each transcription page) as well as by the two-part division of this edition of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks (revealed in part by the italicized pages \i 266 \i0 and \i 268 \i0 in the above illustration), demand the following diagram, arranged in chronological order:}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1087\fi0\ri0\sb228\sa0\tx2621\tlhyph\tx4855\tlhyph\tx6919\tlhyph\tx7978\tlhyph\tx8796 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Notebooks\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f0\cchs0 A{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }B{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab } \expndtw-2 CI\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-11 C2\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1087\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx2621\tlhyph\tx4378\tlhyph\tx6907 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 MWS Draft\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f0\cchs0 I{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab } \expndtw-11 II\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1097\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2621\tlhyph\tx3874\tlhyph\tx5261\tlhyph\tx6907 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-7\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 1818\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\loch\f0\cchs0 I{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-12 II\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-10 III\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1090\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx2626\tlhyph\tx4414\tlhyph\tx6910 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Bod. Dep.\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-6\loch\f0\cchs0 c. 477/1\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab } \expndtw-5 c. 534/1\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab } \expndtw-4 c. 534/2-}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1099\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tlhyph\tx4872\tlhyph\tx7778 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 1816-17 Rob.     \i0 Part One{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-5 Part Two\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb307\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Bodleian Foliation: Although all leaves of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks are now foliated in pencil at the top right of each recto (and are cited as reference points in the headers, textual commentary, and Quiring Charts), the photofacsimiles of the manuscript leaves (photographed in 1993) reproduce the Bodleian folio numbers only in Dep. c. 477/1 (deposited in 1974 and then foliated by Margaret Crum); Dep. c. 534/1-2, although deposited in 1976, was not foliated until 31 January 1995, when, after a discussion about a suitable ordering of the leaves, Bruce Barker-Benfield penciled the folio numbers onto each recto. The Library's purpose in adding such foliation was not to dictate an order of leaves (the presence of insertions allows for several alternatives) but to enable a neutral mode of citation for each surviving piece of paper.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri19\sb254\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Notes: Notes that address the physical conditions of a manuscript page are positioned with all other textual notes at the bottom of each transcription page.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri31\sb233\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Transcription Pages (rectos)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri22\sb178\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The recto pages contain not only the type facsimile of the manuscript text but also (line by line) a literal transcript of the 2SIS text as well as a textual apparatus in the form of footnotes.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri7\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Type Facsimile of the Manuscript: This type facsimile of the manuscript text was initially prepared from the high-resolution black-and-white photographs, then checked twice (for a period of 4 weeks in January/ February 1995 and then for another week in September 1995) against the original manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, and then read aloud against the photographs in an attempt to represent accurately the text of the original. The text of the type facsimile was formatted by WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS, using "Tables" to create 2 or 3 columns and using "Styles" to create different fonts by which to distinguish MWS's hand from that of PBS and to represent other peculiarities of the manuscript (for example, smear deletions and Bodleian foliation). At a glance, the reader should be able to determine just what words and suggestions PBS introduced into MWS's novel. These different fonts and other conventions used in the type facsimile are as follows:}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li372\fi0\ri12\sb70\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Cancel Lines: There are three means by which cancelations are represented. Individual letters or words or phrases that then MWS and/or PBS canceled by horizontal lines are represented by the strikeover feature: e.g., word or word (in the latter case, the manuscript cancel line did not pass through all of the letters of the word).\super 8\nosupersub  Although I did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS from PBS horizontal cancel lines, the surrounding words in most instances should make possible the identification of who canceled what words: e.g., PBS replacement words would indicate that he had just canceled the words to be replaced. Footnotes are occasionally used to identify whether a letter or word or phrase was canceled by either MWS or PBS.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li374\fi367\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Longer cancelations are much easier to distinguish. Ink and other evidence prove that MWS always canceled with long vertical straight lines (represented by a graphics line feature in WordPerfect), whereas PBS always canceled longer sections of the manuscript with wavy lines (represented by wavy ink lines that have been drawn on the transcript page in an attempt to replicate the original manuscript.)\super 9}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li384\fi0\ri0\sb72\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Carets: Although I did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS from PBS carets, the hand used for the}\par }