{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl633\margr1194\margt1315\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn633\margrsxn1194\margtsxn1315\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5395\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9490 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook \scaps0 A\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xxxvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li394\fi0\ri2\sb622\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 (folios 12 through 15 [pages 57/59, 60/61, 62/blank, and blank/63]) and "Y" (folios 16 and 17 [pages 57/ 58 and \i 59+64/65], \i0 as well as folio 18 [an unpaglnated slip of different paper that Is described as "Third Insert" below]). MWS needed these extra pages In order to revise what was apparently Draft: Vol II, Ch. [5], a chapter that she would have written not long after finishing a "very long" chapter on 5 December 1816, but the way the name of Safle changes from "JVtaimouna" to "Amlna" to "Safle" In these reconstructed blfolla suggests that she did not make the changes until April 1817. All of these intersections between "X" and "Y" are Important because they offer the only manuscript link between the last extant page of Notebook A (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3, page 21) and the first extant page of Notebook B (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62 (for the \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  \i0 text that now fills part of that gap, see pages 312-313 In this edition; for more Information on these name changes, see "Naming In the \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks" below; for a visual representation of "X" and " Y," see Quiring Charts\super 19\nosupersub  below; for the labyrinthine path through "X" and "Y," see the likely sequence of MWS's revisions as outlined on transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition and as evidenced in the photofacslmiles, transcriptions, and notes on pages 314-342).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li389\fi0\ri0\sb65\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Third Insert Slip (Dep* c. 534/l\sub 5\nosupersub  folio 18\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 from the "Y\super ?5\nosupersub  Insert): This third Insert was written on a slip of paper that was used to link the last page of light-blue paper In Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 17 verso [page \i 65\}) \i0 and the first page of cream paper in Notebook B (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 19 recto [page 62]). The slip consists of the top part of one leaf (that is, a half-sheet) of laid paper (commercially cut at top and outside edges), of cream color, that measures 89-91 x 186-188 mm., yielding estimated sheet measure\-ments of [height unknown] x 372-376 mm. The paper has no surviving watermark but Is probably of British origin. The lower edge is roughly torn (below the completed text), but the inside edge Is more neatly torn against a fold, at which (about 46 mm. from the top edge) Is a hole that could well be a sewing hole (though other tears at the Inside edge make It hard to be certain). The slip (while blank) may have been torn from another notebook, which may have been turned to because all the light-blue paper of Notebook A had been exhausted. The text follows directly from folio 17 verso (completing the word "language") and concludes with a later and revised version of part of a sentence that had been written on the top two lines of folio 19 recto, which is the first surviving leaf of Notebook B.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li31\fi0\ri0\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook A: Additional information on the physical makeup of the original notebook Is to be found in notes positioned at the bottom of transcription pages.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1385\fi0\ri0\sb466\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Symbols in the Charts}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1445\fi0\ri0\sb257\sa0\tlhyph\tx1778\tx2179\tx3557 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-2\loch\f0\cchs0 Existing leaf\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-1\loch\f0\cchs0 I       Bifolium, still joined (or singleton and stub, still joined)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1442\fi0\ri0\sb122\sa0\tlhyph\tx1745\tx2165\tx3557 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-1\loch\f0\cchs0 Missing leaf\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i\loch\f0\cchs0 \\      \i0 Bifolium, now separated, but former join confirmed from matches}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li3862\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 of the torn or cut edges}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li96\fi0\ri0\sb432\sa0\tx6106 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 First Insert\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f0\cchs0 Dep. c. 477/1}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1478\fi125\ri5779\sb122\sa60\sl-197\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\loch\af0\dbch\af2\hich\f0\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 \u9632\'3f\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  \i BodL       MWS \dbch\af2\loch\af0\hich\f0\cchs0 \u9632\'3f\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0     folios        pages        Watermarks}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn2389\margrsxn2497\margtsxn1315\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw3088\colsr1154\colno2\colw2779 {\shp {\*\shpinst \shpleft3866\shptop77\shpright3866\shpbottom331\shpfhdr0\shpbxmargin\shpbypara\shpwr3\shpwrk0\shpfblwtxt1\shpz0\shplid1{\sp{\sn shapeType}{\sv 20}}{\sp{\sn lineWidth}{\sv 7620}}}}{\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx552 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18  1\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx552 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent552\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 _/__        \scaps t \scaps0 W \i &c \i0 B I BOTFIELD}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb24\sa0\tx552\tx1435 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18  2\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb24\sa0\tx552\tx1435 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent552\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 _/_\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\expndtw-1\loch\f0\cchs0 Britannia I 1815}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb7\sa0\tx552 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18  3\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb7\sa0\tx552 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent552\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 ___/_        TW&B I BOTFIELD}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb202\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs18 (lower third torn away before writing)}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn633\margrsxn1194\margtsxn1315\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2376\fi-821\ri2150\sb257\sa0\sl-281\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\i0\b\cf1\charscalex133\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs14 Ollire \b0 I     I\super ?1\nosupersub\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'b0\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  \super\charscalex100\expndtw0 or\nosupersub  12]*\{quire of indeterminable size, its relationship to the endleaf-structure unknown) No surviving leaves.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri24\sb247\sa0\sl-151\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs14 *It seems reasonable to hypothesize this missing quire by assuming that MWS's pagination sequence coincided with the start of Notebook A. If so, then her pagination suggests that 40 pages (20 leaves) are now lost from the beginning of her Draft, which would have preceded the first surviving pages 41/42 that formed the last leaf of its quire. These numbers would yield two quires at the start, one of ten leaves and one of twelve: the totally missing first quire may have had a one-leaf discrepancy caused by its links with the endleaf-structure or by the start of the text; the second quire survives with just its last leaf, pages 41/42. This reconstruction is supported by the number of words in 1818 that were eventually produced by the missing pages (see pages 2, 6, and 7 in this edition for the computations about Walton's introductory Letters and part of Draft: Vol. I., Ch. [1]). This reconstruction is also supported by evidence suggesting that MWS changed from foliating to paginating Notebook A (see "Foliation and Pagination in Notebook A" and note 16).}\par }