{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl623\margr1228\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn623\margrsxn1228\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li1558\fi137\ri1548\sb0\sa0\sl-595\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs56 List of Beta-Radiographs in The \i0 Frankenstein \i Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb845\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The beta-radiographs listed below have been selected as a representative sample of the watermarks in the Notebooks. As positioned, each beta-radiograph shows the watermark-pattern as most intelligibly viewed, irrespective of its current position on the individual leaf. However, an attempt to describe the position of each watermark relative to its leaf (but not to its original whole sheet as manufactured) is made in the captions. These captions also distinguish by "recto" or "verso" the side of the leaf from which the watermark is to be viewed (further distinguished as the "mould" or "felt" side of the paper). [The concluding square brackets further identify the Notebook from which the leaf came, as well as the page number (in italics) in this edition where the photofacsimile of that recto or verso may be viewed.]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi362\ri2\sb0\sa250\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There are three kinds of pairings in the sample beta-radiographs below: pairs where the bifolium contains two different watermarks, one on each side (see Figs. 7-8, where the once conjoint leaves have been separated); pairs where the fold of a bifolium splits a watermark into two halves (see Figs. 1-2 and 3-4, where leaves once conjoint were later separated by tearing across the watermark at the fold; and Figs. 10-11, where leaves once conjoint were later separated by cutting across the watermark near the fold); and artificially constructed pairs (see Figs. 12-13 for one watermark that is constructed from two leaves that were not originally conjoint; and see Figs. \i 5-6 \i0 for two watermarks that would ordinarily be divided by the fold of a bifolium but in this case are taken from two leaves that were not originally conjoint).}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn633\margrsxn1271\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw720\colsr173\colno2\colw9112 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li110\fi0\ri53\sb0\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Fig. 1. \expndtw-3 Fig. 2. Fig. 3. Fig. 4. Fig. 5. Fig. 6. Fig. 7. Fig. 8. Fig. 9.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri46\sb269\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Fig. 10. \expndtw-3 Fig. 11. \expndtw-2 Fig. 12.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri46\sb0\sa0\sl-269\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Fig. 13. \expndtw-2 Fig. 14. Fig. 15.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb281\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-2\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Fig. 16.}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb7\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 27 verso [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook A: page \i 122]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 33 recto [= "mould" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook A: page \i 148]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb5\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 34 recto [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook A: page \i 152]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 26 verso [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook A: page \i 118]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 3 recto [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook A insert: page \i 24]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 2 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook A insert: page \i 22]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/1, folio 89 recto [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook B: page \i 622]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/1, folio 94 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook B: see page \i 642 \i0 for folio 94 recto]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/1, folio 38 verso [="felt" side], sideways at lower outside corner [Notebook B insert:}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-1\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 page \i 418]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 3 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook CI: page \i 656]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 10 verso [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook CI: page \i 686]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 21 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook C2: page \i 732]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 23 verso [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook C2: page \i 744]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 30 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook C2 insert: page \i 772]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 534/2, folio 31 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge [Notebook C2 substitute: page}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li26\fi0\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-8\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 774]}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Dep. c. 477/1, folio 63 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [The Cyrus Fragment: page \i 826]}\par }