{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1469\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1469\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li22\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1106 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Iviii\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri10\sb643\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 monster], yet feel that [he]\super 32\nosupersub  has done what needs justification; it is in the superstitious horror with which they contemplate alike [his] wrongs and their revenge; that the dramatic character of what [he] did and suffered, consists" (PBS \i Cenci, \i0 page x). Such a sentence reveals the genius of PBS as dramatist and the genius of MWS as novelist\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 both wished to implicate the reader in moral dilemmas, and MWS forced a very hard decision on her editors and her readers.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi358\ri5\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The names of the other characters in \i Frankenstein \i0 are just as important for the meaning of the novel. Many critics have previously remarked on the injustice done to/wsrine, on the more masculine Frankenstem opposed to a more feminine \i Clerval, \i0 and on \i Safie \i0 (a variant of \i Sophia) \i0 standing at the center of this novel about the dangerous consequences of the pursuit of knowledge. Those who study these etymologies will be delighted to discover in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks that MWS entertained and used other names for a number of characters, the most important of which are Elizabeth, Clerval, and Safie. I am concerned less with the root meanings of these and other characters\super 5\nosupersub  changing names and more with the fact that these changes give evidence of the ur-text as well as the process and sometimes the date of revisions in the Notebooks. (For a recent and extended discussion of the possible sources of some of the names in Frankenstein, especially a single source for the name of Maimouna/Amina/Safie, see Ketterer, "Draft," pages 250-274.\super 33\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi358\ri10\sb79\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Elizabeth Lavenza was called "Myrtella" ("myrtle," held sacred by Venus, was an emblem of love) in Draft: Vol I, Ch. 10, page 117, and in Ch. 13, page 148, two Notebook A passages that MWS drafted apparently in November 1816, one before and one after the 20th (see transcription pages 181 and 243 in this edition). In both cases the most logical explanation is that MWS was copying from an ur-text where "Myrtella" was the name of Victor's cousin and betrothed. In both cases the earlier name was replaced by "Elizabeth," the name MWS had decided upon no later than early October 1816, by which time she was writing the name "Elizabeth" on the first extant page of Notebook A (see pages 10-11 in this edition). There is another and later place in Notebook B where MWS may have started to write "Myrtella" when she meant to write "Elizabeth"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see "M Elizabeth" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, original page 102 (see transcription page 441 in this edition), a passage that may have been drafted in early January 1817. (For the conjectured dates when MWS was drafting these passages, see "\i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for November 1816 and for January 1817.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi350\ri0\sb77\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Henry Clerval went through a more complicated series of incarnations. He was evidently called "Henry Carignan" in the ur-text as well as in the beginning pages of the extant Draft, but within three pages "Carignan" had become "Clerval": see Draft Vol. I, Ch. [1], page 41, lines 23-24; page 42, lines 35-36; and page 43, line 8 (pages 10-15 in this edition). MWS would have made this change no later than early October 1816, and "Clerval" (or the variant "Clairval") was the form used throughout the remainder of the novel. The abandoned name "Carignan" has been glossed in \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  Crook \i0 (page 25) in a note to the spa town of Thonon that Victor and his family visited when he was thirteen ("eleven" in the Draft). According to Crook, Thonon had been recently restored to the kingdom of Piedmont and Sardinia, the second in line for the throne of which was Charles Albert Savoy-Carignan, whose irregular Rousseauesque education was a matter of some concern at the time. Crook then hinted that MWS might have had something in mind with Clerval's earlier name when she suggested that "these topicalities may lie, displaced, behind \i Frankenstein."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi355\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Not only the topical or the literary stood behind some of the names in MWS's fiction\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 she also would name her characters with reference to or echoes of the names among her circle of acquaintances. Such seems to be the case with "Clerval," which recalls "Clairmont"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 not so much Claire Clairmont but rather Charles Clairmont, whose interest in languages parallels that of Henry Clerval. At one period while drafting her novel, MWS appears to have made the echo even greater, for there are twenty places in Notebook B where the name is "Clairval" (only later was the "ai" canceled and replaced by an "e" in nineteen of these places, the cancelations most likely made at one sitting in April/May 1817\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see below for more on this dating). Because the variations on Clerval's name can lead to very misleading suppositions,\super 34\nosupersub 1 offer the following chronology that best explains what happened.}\par }