{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl574\margr1288\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn574\margrsxn1288\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7838\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9823 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Introduction\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 lix}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li725\fi0\ri0\sb631\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [PJune-late September] 1816: "Carignan" in the ur-text (see above for explanation).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li730\fi0\ri713\sb70\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [no later than early October] 1816: "Carignan" written and then canceled and then replaced by "Clerval" in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. [1] (see above for explanation).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li710\fi0\ri713\sb132\sa0\sl-240\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Pearly January 1817]: "Clairval" was the name in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, original page 100, but "Clerval" was the name later in this chapter on original pages 101-103. This apparently incorrect or at least inconsistent "Clairval" was not separately corrected to "Clerval" (see below for the nineteen places where MWS did alter "Clairval" to "Clerval"), but the passage in which "Clairval" appeared was canceled by MWS between 18 April and 10/13 May 1817 (see pages 416-427 in this edition for the dating of the cancelations), making the separate alteration unnecessary. When an unpaginated insert was added to Ch. 10 in April/May 1817, "Clerval" was used (see transcription page 435 in this edition).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li713\fi0\ri718\sb144\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Pearly January 1817] and [P18 March-9 April 1817]: The one use of "Clairval" in Ch. 10 (possibly a mistake occasioned by MWS often writing out the names "Claire" and "Clairmont" in letters) may have prompted MWS to change the spelling of the name, for the next nineteen instances of the name in Draft: Vol.II., Chs. 11-17, were "Clairval," each of which was altered to "Clerval" at a later time, most likely in April/May 1817 at one sitting when MWS was fair copying her novel. The first "ai" that is canceled and replaced by "e" is in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 11 [renumbered "2" for the three-volume sequence], page 108 (see pages 452-453 in this edition): the dark ink on the renumbered chapter "2" seems to be the same as that used for the alterations of "Clairval" to "Clerval."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li720\fi0\ri713\sb146\sa0\sl-240\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Pearly April 1817]: By this time, MWS had decided on "Clerval" as evidenced by the six instances of that spelling in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 18, and by the four instances of that spelling in the extant Fair Copy.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li722\fi0\ri722\sb67\sa0\sl-240\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?April/May 1817]: MWS altered the nineteen instances of "Clairval" to "Clerval," most likely during the time she was fair copying her novel.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi362\ri10\sb235\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Safie most likely was not in the ur-text, and when she was introduced into that "very long" Chapter 4 that MWS wrote in late November/early December (she finished it by 5 December\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronol\-ogy" as well as transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition), she was apparently first called "Maimouna," a name that may be traced to William Southey's Maimuna in \i Tkalaba, \i0 a name that PBS used as a nickname for his friend Mrs. Boinville and thafhe used in his prose fragment "The Assassins" for Khaled's daughter (a precursor of Cythna in PBS's \i Laon and Cythna)?* \i0 The evidence that Safie was first called "Maimouna" is to be found in Notebook B as well as in the "X" and "Y" rewrite inserts that MWS used to help join Notebooks A and B in April 1817. When MWS started to rewrite this section of her novel on the yet remaining paper from Notebook A (and we lack any manuscript evidence for earlier sections of the Safie episode), she first changed the already denominated "Maimouna" to "Amina" and used that name four times on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page \i 59 \i0 and page 60 ["X" insert] but then mistakenly reverted to "Maimouna" (only to change it to "Amina") one more time on page 60. MWS then decided to rewrite this "X" insert with a " Y" insert by which time she had decided on the name "Safie," a name that MWS apparently did not use in her novel prior to April 1817.\super 36 \nosupersub She continued her narrative about the newly named "Safie" up through half of Draft: Ch. [5], page 59+64 [" Y" insert] and then doubled back to use already existing text in "X" where she replaced the short-lived "Amina" with "girl" in one place (on page 59) and with the new name of "Safie" three times (twice on page \i 59 \i0 and once on page 60). Pen and ink evidence suggest that MWS had stopped writing on the "X" pages at line 25; having reached that point by doubling back, she then began again to write her revised narrative at lines 25 and 26 of Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page 60 ["X" insert], from which point Safie was called only "Safie." "Safie" continued to be the unemended name as MWS finished the rewrite on "X" and then returned to the " Y" insert and began again to rewrite her narrative at lines 13-14 in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page 59+64 ["Y" insert]. (Those not wishing to follow all these intricacies are invited merely to follow the narrative in the sequence I have outlined by reading the unshadowed sections in pages 317-341 in this edition.) That all of these changes from the original "Maimouna" to the short-lived and intermediating "Amina" to the final "Safie" were made in April 1817 (after MWS had finished all or most of her Draft) is indicated by the fact that MWS continued to use the original "Maimouna" in the remaining chapters of Notebook B: see transcription pages 353, 359,}\par }