{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1457\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1477\margrsxn6528\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols2\colno1\colw720\colsr365\colno2\colw2820 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb79\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs14 IXX}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1457\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri22\sb641\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 used in the very process of the transcription to record and to calculate the pages in the Fair Copy). In the absence of any evidence to suggest a draft intervening between Draft and Fair Copy, there is all the more reason to conclude that PBS's transcriptions at the end of the Fair Copy were his alone. The rhetorical flourishes in these concluding Fair-Copy pages, where PBS embellished MWS's Draft, not only give evidence that these words were his but also suggest that MWS was not reading aloud from the Draft with PBS transcribing her words. In this regard, there is no evidence in any of these notebooks that either of the Shelleys wrote what the other dictated.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi353\ri19\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 How and when the two Shelleys exchanged the Notebooks we will never know for certain, but there is ample pen and ink evidence to show that PBS read sections of the text at least twice\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 almost all of the Draft pages reveal PBS's hand, and many of the pages suggest that he brought different pens and inks to his editing. He most likely read each chapter (or groups thereof) as MWS wrote them, and then appears to have read all of Notebooks A and B at one final sitting, probably in April when MWS was correcting them. We know, e.g., that PBS read Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10 at least twice: once (possibly in January 1817) he wrote in the margin to suggest that it should be ''\ul Victor's\ul0  proposal" to journey to England; and then later (the postmark and other evidence proving that it was between 9 and 17 April) he read and corrected the pages that MWS rewrote.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi353\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 There are times in the manuscript when you can actually "see" MWS and PBS at work on the Notebooks at the same time, possibly sitting side by side and using the same pen and ink to draft the novel and at the same time to enter corrections. We know from Sophia Stacey that in Florence PBS "at night has a little table with pen and ink, she [MWS] the same" (quoted in Angeli, page 97)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 apparently, these were portable writing desks that allowed the two Shelleys to work near each other in their room at night. Evidence of that closeness is on folio 3 verso of Notebook A, the last of the six rough-draft insert pages that MWS used to introduce more information on Victor's scientific interests (see pages 34-35 in this edition). MWS wrote the page in very distinctive pale gray ink (quite different from the black ink she later used to add "the science of" in line 18). Because PBS seems to have been the one to have written "natural philosophy" in the same distinctive pale gray ink and because he certainly made emendations in the darker ink, there is a very considerable probability that the two Shelleys twice worked together on this page between 27 October and 4 November 1816 (see \i "Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" below for these dates).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi360\ri10\sb5\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Much more research remains to be done on the collaboration between the two Shelleys, especially now that the pages revealing PBS's hand in \i Frankenstein \i0 are available in photofacsimile. We all owe a great debt to Bruce Barker-Benfield who established in December 1993 through his Quiring Charts that all of the now separated leaves from the Draft and Fair Copy were once part of bound notebooks, a circumstance that not only tells us a great deal about the composition of the novel but also more about the collaboration between the two Shelleys. As these notebooks were passed back and forth between MWS and PBS, so also were ideas and phrases that went into the making of \i Frankenstein. \i0 We know, for example, that MWS took wholesale a PBS Diary entry and incorporated it into her novel (see "\i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for 23 June 1816), but James P. Carson has reminded us that collaboration goes both ways: PBS's significant addition about the "republican institutions of our country" (Victor here speaking about Switzerland\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 126-129 in this edition), which could not have been drafted until at least November 1816 (see "\i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology"), seems to echo a passage that MWS apparently wrote in a letter dated 1 June 1816. The nature of the echo, however, is complicated by MWS having rewritten this now missing letter when she prepared her Geneva letters for publication in the Shelleys' collaborative \i History of a Six Weeks' Tour \i0 (published November 1817). Related to this conundrum about who echoes whom are PBS's and Godwin's later admissions in 1818 that MWS would be the perfect person to write about the "calumniated Republicans" in a book on the Commonwealth in British History, a subject in which PBS confessed that he was "little skilled" (see PBS \i Letters, \i0 II, 21 and n.).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi362\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 It should be clear that any analysis of these complicated intertextualities demands a study of the facts of just who wrote what when, as well as an understanding that some of the facts are beyond discovery or resist reconstruction.\super 51\nosupersub  Also required is an understanding of what Jack Stillinger has described as "Multiple Authorship and the Myth of Solitary Genius." Moreover, a study of this particular kind of mutual influence}\par }