{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl673\margr1146\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn673\margrsxn1146\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7608\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9586 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-7\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxiii}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri34\sb715\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  20.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri34\sb715\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is almost certain that the paper used for the two quarter sheets of SC 339 (which are discussed and represented by photofacsimile in SC, IV, 733-744) originated in Notebook B: the position of the two fragmentary watermarks of "180[6]" and "1806" are consistent with the position of the watermark "JL I 1806" on the half sheets of NotebookB; and the measurements provided for the larger of the two quarter sheets (7.8" x6.2" \i = c. \i0 199 x 158 mm. for a quarter sheet = \i c. \i0 199 x 316 mm. for a half sheet) are close enough to the half-sheet measurements of 199-202 x 310-311 mm. to warrant the likelihood of the source. Although not provable for certain without a direct side-by-side comparison of the actual paper in Notebook B and SC 399, the link between the two strongly suggests that PBS was drafting at least parts of his "Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics" at or near the time that MWS was drafting \i Frankenstein. \i0 Compare the link between "Speculations" and \i Frankenstein \i0 by way of the Botfield paper, discussed above in note 17.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri31\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  21.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri31\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The evidence for both the address and the circular double-rimmed black postmark is minimal, but the capital "M" on the address panel is clearly in the hand of William Godwin; Godwin at this time addressed letters to MWS as "M\super rs\nosupersub  Shelley" and to PBS, as "P B Shelley" (see transcription page 419 in this edition); and there is enough of the smudged and partly torn away postmark to use with Godwin's diary to confirm that the date is 9 April 1817.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  22.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The last likely date for any revision would be 29 April 1817, when MWS did both "Transcribe and correct F." (see "\i Frankenstein \i0 Chronology" for that date).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri36\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  23.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri36\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Note that MWS always canceled extended passages in The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks with long vertical lines, whereas PBS always used wavy cancel lines (see pages 123 and 223 in this edition in order to contrast the two patterns).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  24.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The wet offset ink blots on folio 42 verso (offset from folio 43 recto), definite but out of alignment, prove that at least one of these facing leaves was already loose in the volume when the ink of the corrections was still wet\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and they suggest that the leaf was loose when MWS drafted the revised text on folio 43 recto (see notes on transcription page 435 in this edition as well as the visual evidence on pages 434 and 436).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  25.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The sewing holes of both notebooks, each at three stations, have a professional appearance but are not identical: the holes in CI seem larger and more evident, and they are not quite aligned with the less definite pattern of sewing holes in C2.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  26.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri29\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There are other examples of 24-leaf notebooks still intact in the decorative paper covers in the Abinger collection: Dep. e. 273 (William Godwin, "Supplement to Journal" for dates in 1793 and 1795); and Dep. d. 563-4 (from a series of notebooks used for transcripts by John Gisborne at Plymouth in the early 1830s).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  27.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 One significant notation, most likely made by a compositor, is on lines 14-15 of pages 680-681 in this edition, where a bracket (usually used by the Shelleys and the printers to mark the beginning of a paragraph) is used in conjunction with " [Vol. III-G121]" to indicate that the marked word begins page 121, the first page in the new gathering signed "G," in Volume III of the \i 1818 \i0 edition. Compositors often "signed" printer's copy, indicating where they began and/or finished setting type. For other examples among the Bodleian Shelley manuscripts, see photofacsimiles as well as pages 124, 134 (n.6), and 139 in O'Neill.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  28.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri24\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Later sewing holes at the top inside corner of folio 30 suggest that it was later tagged together with the final leaves of Notebook C2.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  29.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The substitute folio 31 is probably not from one and the same notebook that was used for the translation of Aeschylus because the single leaf's torn edge and half-watermark do not align with the edges and half-watermarks of the twelve leaves used for the translation, but the identical measurements between the single leaf and the twelve leaves (together with an identical commercial ruling) mean that the two notebooks were probably purchased at the same time. The complete watermark found on the single surviving bifolium (folios 73 and 84) of the Aseschylus Notebook is a posthorn in a crowned shield over a monogram "CB[?]"; folios 74-83 each contain the top half of the watermark.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  30.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The day after writing this sentence and the first two paragraphs in this section in August 1996,1 encountered an excellent article by Bernard Duyfhuizen that skillfully addresses this important issue of naming. Duyfhuizen also makes some interesting remarks on the way that "wretch" supports a doppelganger reading of the novel.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li499\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  31.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li499\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The "hideous progeny" also, of course, refers to MWS's own novel that she bids "go forth and prosper."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  32.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Even something as simple as a pronoun can implicate or incriminate an editor\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 "[he]" could have been "[it]."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li499\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  33.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li499\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For an often overlooked, brief, but provocative treatment of names in MWS's fiction, see St. Clair, "Shelley."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  34.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi499\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1039 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent540\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Before doing the \i\super cc\nosupersub Frankenstein \i0 Chronology," I was tempted to use the alterations in ClervaPs name to suggest that MWS drafted all or part of Notebook B (where "Clairval" is to be found) before she drafted all or most of Notebook A (where "Clerval" is to be found). But all other things about The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks persuade me that could not have been the case. And Ketterer's even more convoluted "inward-moving spiral" hypothesis in his "Draft" essay, pages 254 ff., is just not to be believed, for it flies in the face of all the other evidence to the contrary: e.g., MWS}\par }