{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl685\margr1140\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn685\margrsxn1140\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7682\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9665 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-6\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 Introduction\expndtw0\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxv}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri26\sb622\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  44.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri26\sb622\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Other numbers discussed on transcription pages 9, 583, and 775 concern the pencil notations made by "R. L." who surveyed the MWS and PBS manuscripts for one of the Lords Abinger, providing other clues as to what was extant at that time.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  45.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There is evidence in the form of a secret code in Godwin's Diary that he and Mary Wollstonecraft were having sexual intercourse at this time\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see St. Clair, \i Godwins & Shelleys, \i0 "Appendix I: Godwin's sexual relationship with Mary Wollstonecraft," pages 497-503. St. Clair reasons that MWS was more likely conceived in November 1796 (a month in keeping with the birth of the monster), but the evidence can be interpreted in a number of different ways. And MWS may have adjusted the 276-day gestation period by 13 days at both ends: that is, conceived on or around 29 November 1796, MWS started the novel 13 days later on 11 December 17[96]; born on 30 August 1797, MWS ended the novel 13 days later on 12 September 17[97].}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  46.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb5\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 It is time for someone to create a full chronology of the action in this narrative, revealing such important dates as 1789 for Victor going off to university and 1793 for the creation of the monster, both years resonating with the events of the French Revolution. Mellor (pages 54-55, 237-238), \i\expndtw15 1818\expndtw0  Wolf A \i0 (pages 340-342), and others have attempted the chronology, but some murkiness in the text makes them get a year off here and there. (And MWS's change from 26 to 28 May may have been the source of the problem, for the 27th would have placed William's death in 1794, a year more in'keeping with elapsed time elsewhere in the narrative.) Anyone attempting a full chronology will need to consider not only date changes in these Notebooks but also the changes between \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  \i0 and \i 1831.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  47.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri22\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For additional places where there are changes between manuscript and \i 1818, \i0 see transcription pages 37 (line 22), 177 (line 15), 613 (line 33), and 617 (line 1).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  48.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 For a transcription of this rhyming game (called "bout-rimes") from the Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. e. 12, page 185, see Barker-Benfield, \i Guitar, \i0 pages 128-129. For a brief consideration of this and other collaborations between the Shelleys, see MWS \i Dramas, \i0 page 19, n.l, and pages 9-10: in her fair copies of \i Prosperpine \i0 and \i Midas, \i0 MWS transcribed and incorporated four of PBS's lyrics that he wrote for these dramas in the winter of 1820/21.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  49.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 I have a much better sense of what this kind of collaboration means after having benefited from the advice of more than a dozen scholars who have read and improved an earlier draft of this "Introduction." As I indicate in the "Acknowledgments," one of these scholars, Bruce Barker-Benfield, was very much present in the making of many parts of this edition.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  50.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Mellor, e.g., cautioning those who saw MWS's anxiety of authorship in her use of the word "author" to describe Victor, reminded everyone that it was PBS rather than MWS who called Victor an "author" of his own misery and of the monster. Mellor (page \i 65) \i0 was correct in her judgment, and now everyone can use these photofacsimiles to inspect the unequivocal evidence that the word "author" was in PBS's hand in these four crucial places. (See PBS's characteristic "r" [and also "a"] in each "author" on pages 228-229, 262-263, 264-265, and 758-759 [also 813] in this edition\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 also contrast the look of MWS's "author" on pages \i 55-56 \i0 of this edition; and even see pages 22-23 where a PBS "authors" in line 6 may be contrasted with an MWS "authors" in line 19. Granted, there are considerable similarities between the two hands, but the contexts of each word on pages 22-23'wjll train the eye to distinguish MWS's from PBS's hand.) Being able to distinguish these two hands with more precision will'also help to confirm and/or modify the fascinating research undertaken by John F. Burrows, whose computational stylistics has led to a conclusion that MWS (as well as Mary Robinson and Emily Bronte) had a style more resembling male than other female writers. However, even Burrows' more moderate conclusion that this distinction may "best be understood as reflecting differences of education rather than gender" (page S3.ii) will have to be tested against new data in which his sample passages from \i Frankenstein \i0 do not include text that came directly from PBS rather than MWS.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  51.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 See, e.g., the different ways that E. B. Murray (PBS \i Prose, \i0 I, 429-446) and Jeanne Moskal (MWS \i Travel Writing, \i0 pages 1-8) have reconstructed the Shelleys' collaboration on \i History of a Six Weeks' Tour.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  52.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi504\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart44\pnindent538\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 In a final collaborative act, Nora Crook informed me about Angela Leighton's \i TLS \i0 review (2 August 1996) of Zachary Leader's just released \i Revision and Romantic Authorship, \i0 a book that I had overlooked but that fortunately the University of Delaware Library had just purchased and processed. Leader's chapter on "Parenting \i Frankenstein" \i0 (pages 167-205) deftly counters some of Mellor's judgments that PBS's revisions were for the worse, but it perpetuates on pages 167,171 (n. 17), and 191a few errors \i\expndtw20 (1818\expndtw0  \i0 was not published in March; there was no need for caution by Leader or by \i 1831 Smith \i0 [page 274 and n.] in attributing those four instances of the word "author" to PBS; and at least part of the Fair Copy "surfaced" a number of years ago). On the whole, however, Leader provides an important view of the two Shelleys' collaboration: he makes the valid point that collaboration need not be "imposition"; he demonstrates that MWS was very much in control of her own novel; and he judges PBS's "alterations" in keeping with the evidence now contained within The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks.}\par }