{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1452\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1452\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qc\li0\fi0\ri19\sb0\sa0\sl-562\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\up1\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs56 Frankenstein \i Chronology}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri29\sb838\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 All of the entries in this chronology, with the exception of a few birth and death dates, make up a narrative about the conception, draft, fair copy, publication, and reception of MWS's novel\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 as well as the provenance of The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks. Notes supplement or qualify some entries.\super 1\nosupersub  (Parentheses are used in most entries to gloss or extend the data that is provided in the entry. For the latest and fullest " Chronology of Life and Works " of MWS, see \i 1818 Crook, \i0 pages Ixxv-lxxxvii.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri34\sb259\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 30 August 1797 MWS was born to William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft, her mother dying eleven days later on 10 September.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri36\sb252\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June-November 1812; June 1813-March 1814 MWS resided with the family of William Baxter in Scotland, providing her a basis for some of the descriptions of Scotland in \i Frankenstein.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri22\sb257\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?5] May 1814 MWS met PBS, most likely for the second time, in London at the house of her father, William Godwin.\super 2}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri31\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 July 1814 MWS and PBS (accompanied by MWS's step-sister Claire Clairmont) eloped to the Continent, where they toured France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland for a period of six weeks.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri24\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 December 1814 MWS recorded in her London Journal that she attended "Garnerin's lecture\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 on Electric\-ity\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 the gasses\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 & the Phantasmagoria" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, \i 56), \i0 revealing that she was interested in matters scientific prior to conceiving \i Frankenstein.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb278\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22 February and 6 March 1815      MWS and PBS's daughter was born prematurely and died.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri0\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [late August/early September] 1815 MWS, her step brother Charles Clairmont, PBS, and Thomas Love Peacock journeyed from Windsor to Oxford and, while there, "saw the Bodleian Library, the Clarendon Press [i.e., the present Clarendon Building], & walked through Quadrangles of the different Colleges; We visited the very rooms where the two noted Infidels Shelley [PBS] & [his fellow-student Thomas Jefferson] Hogg . . . poured with the incessant & unwearied application of an Alchemyst over the artificial & natural boundaries of human knowledge; brooded over the perceptions which were the offspring of their villainous \i &C \i0 impudent penetration & even dared to threaten the World with the horrid & diabolical project of telling mankind to \ul open its eye\ul0 . I am sure you will duely apreciate the sagacity & rigid justice of the directors, whose anxiety <of> for the commonweal led them to excommunicate such impious monsters" \i (Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 14-15; see also Barker-Benfield, "Visits," pages 392-393). (This passage anticipates \i Frankenstein \i0 in a number of ways, with references to "monsters," "an Alchemyst," "boundaries of human knowledge," and the "Clarendon Press," which was also visited by Victor Frankenstein and Henry Clerval in an unused Draft passage of \i Frankenstein\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 458-461 in this edition; for additional information on the way MWS's later excursion near Oxford affected the narrative of her novel, see 20 October, [22] October, and 28 October 1817 below.)}\par }