{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl601\margr1204\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn601\margrsxn1204\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7606\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9581 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxix}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri48\sb626\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 shrieking and putting his hands to his head, ran out of the room with a candle. Threw water in his face, and after gave him ether. He was looking at Mrs. Sfhelley], and suddenly thought of a woman he had heard of who had eyes instead of nipples, which, taking hold of his mind, horrified him" \i (Polidori Diary, \i0 pages 127-128; this story about PBS was published in the \i New Monthly Magazine \i0 on 1 April 1819\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see below for that date).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri46\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 19 June 1816 Polidori recorded in his Geneva Diary that he "began my ghost story" \i (Polidori Diary, \i0 page 132), a somewhat perplexing entry in that he also "Began" his story the preceding day (see 18 June 1816 above). (For further information on Polidori's two stories at this time, his \i Vampyre \i0 as well as his novel \i Ernestus Berchtold; or, The Modern Oedipus, \i0 see Macdonald, \i Polidori, \i0 pages 83-104; see also 1 April 1819 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri41\sb264\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22-30 June 1816 MWS was apparently writing her "story" at this time while PBS and Byron took their boat tour around Lake Geneva (for the dating of that tour, see Gavin de Beer's "Shelley's Journeys" in \i SC, \i0 IV, 690 ff.; for evidence of MWS writing at that time, see [?19] August 1818 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri34\sb254\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx4553 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 23 June 1816 Without knowing it, PBS was also contributing to the text of \i Frankenstein \i0 when he was on his\line tour with Byron and wrote in his Geneva Notebook Diary that "I/We could observe its [the river Drance] path thro\line the chasm of the mountains & the glens of the lower hills, tmtil The mountains here came closer to the lake, \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'95\'a7\'a3\line \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 w\strike e\strike0  c\strike o\strike0 ald-seetbe-eastei^^\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i\loch\f0\cchs0 so \i0 that \i &c \i0 we approached the amphitheatre which of mountains}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri26\sb0\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone in/under the woods that surrounded & the range of mountain above mountain which overhung it. We arrived at this town about seven a clock" (Erkelenz, pages 126-127).\super 6\nosupersub  (Most important here is that this Diary text about PBS and Byron was used almost verbatim in Victor's description of his boat trip with Elizabeth to Evian on their wedding night [see transcription page 561 in this edition].\super 7\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi358\ri19\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Exactly when MWS worked this text into her novel is not known, but the number of times MWS and/or PBS reworked this original Diary text are considerable: MWS and/or PBS probably transcribed PBS's original Diary text from the Geneva Notebook into MWS's now missing Journal (for June and the first three weeks of July 1816); PBS then reworked the original Diary text (or the lost Journal transcription) into his long descriptive letter to Peacock of 17 July 1816 (see \i SC, \i0 VII, 25-49, especially page 29); MWS appears to have copied this letter of 17 July on 23 July 1816 (see that date below), and in late July/early August she probably reworked the original Diary text (or the lost Journal transcription) into the now lost ur-text of the "story" that eventually became the basis for the two-volume Draft of her entire "novel" \i Frankenstein \i0 in Notebooks A and B; MWS then reworked that "story" text (or the original Diary or the lost Journal text) into Notebook B in March/April 1817 when she wrote Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 16, page 162 (see transcription page 561 in this edition; see also [?18 March-9 April] 1817 below); MWS then in May 1817 transcribed the Draft text into Fair Copy: Vol. Ill, Ch. V, page 113 (see transcription page 669 in this edition; see 18 April-13 May 1817 below); finally, MWS in October 1817 wrote out a revised and condensed version of the original Diary text when she fair copied the letters to Peacock for the text of \i History of a Six Weeks\super 3 \nosupersub Tour \i0 for the printers (see page 114 of the published text; see 10-12 October 1817 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li24\fi0\ri0\sb250\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 21-27 July 1816 MWS, PBS, and Claire Clairmont undertook a week-long excursion to Chamounix, which is described in MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 112-121, as well as in PBS's long letter of 22 July-2 August 1816 to Thomas Love Peacock (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 495-502), the latter used as the basis for Letter IV of 22-28 July 1816 in \i History of a Six Weeks' Tour \i0 (pages 140-172). MWS was involved with all of these texts, for she apparently copied versions of this PBS letter to Peacock (see 23 July 1816, 28 September 1817, and 10-12 October 1817 below), and she used all of these texts for details in \i Frankenstein \i0 when she drafted Victor's j ourney to the Valley of Chamounix with his father, his brother Ernest, and his cousin Myrtella (the name of Elizabeth in an earlier draft or the ur-text): compare especially MWS's description in MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 112-121, with Victor's description in pages 236-267 of this edition, particularly the ascents of Montanvert and the visits to the Mer de Glace.\super 8}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li36\fi0\ri2\sb242\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22 July 1816 PBS in a letter to Byron referred to the Alps as "palaces of Nature" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 495), a phrase from Byron's recently finished \i Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: Canto the Third \i0 (stanza 62) that PBS read to MWS}\par }