{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1460\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1460\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li41\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1226 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Ixxx\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li38\fi0\ri5\sb646\sa0\sl-252\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 "One evening after returning from Diodati. It was in our little room at Chapuis" (see \i MWS Journal, \i0 I,171)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 MWS used that phrase in \i Frankenstein \i0 (see pages 164-165 in this edition).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri5\sb274\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx305 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  23\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri5\sb274\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx305 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart23\pnindent293\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 July 1816 MWS entered in her Geneva Journal\super 9\nosupersub  that "in the evening I copy S\super ?\nosupersub s letter to Peacock" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 117), which could have been PBS's long letter of 17 July 1816 (see \i SC, \i0 VII, 25-49, as well as 23 June 1816 above) and/or PBS's long letter of 22 July-2 August 1816 (see PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 495-502, as well as 21-27 July 1816 above). (If she copied the letter of 22 July-2 August on 23 July, then she could have copied only the first section of that letter [which she could have continued to copy as PBS continued to write it].)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx305 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  24\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx305 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart23\pnindent293\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 July 1816 MWS entered "write my story" into her Geneva Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 118) after she, PBS, and Claire Clairmont returned to the Hotel de Londres following a torrential rain storm in the middle of their week-long excursion to Chamounix from 21 through 27 July. (This is the first direct reference to \i Frankenstein \i0 in the extant MWS Journals\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 although there may have been other references in the Journal entries between mid-June and 21 July that are now lost. This "write my story" and most or all of the other instances of "write" in the \i Journal \i0 up through early August [and possibly up through 18 September or even 7 October 1816] apparently refer to a now lost ur-text of the "story," a shorter tale that became the basis for the text of the two-volume "novel" that MWS would soon draft into Notebooks A and B. For evidence that MWS was actually copying from this lost ur-text or earlier "story" when she was writing Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 13 in Notebook A, see transcription page 241 in this edition where the cancel lines suggest that MWS miscopied, canceled, and then recopied two sentences; see also transcription page 243 where MWS copied the earlier name of "Myrtella" that she then canceled and replaced with the name of "Elizabeth" that was used in all but two places in Notebook A.\super 10\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 29 July and 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 August 1816 MWS entries of "Write" or "write" in her Geneva Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,121-123) most likely refer to her "story" \i Frankenstein \i0 and may in fact indicate that she was writing at this time the episode of the Frankenstein party's excursion to the Valley of Chamounix (which became the source for pages 236-267 in this edition\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 24 July 1816 above). (It is also possible that her "story" was a subject of discussion when MWS and PBS did "talk of our plans" on 3 August.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri7\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 8 August 1816 Charles Clairmont from the French Pyrenees wrote to MWS in Geneva that he had been improving his French, was learning Italian and Spanish, and planned to learn German by going to Frankfort and possibly to "Ingolstat" \i \{Clairmont Correspondence, \i0 I, 63). (These circumstances seem to bear on MWS's plotting of \i Frankenstein, \i0 where Clerval [also called "Clairval" in manuscript] is interested in languages and where Victor studies at the university of Ingolstadt.\super 11\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri12\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 12 August 1816 MWS entry of "Write my story" into her Geneva Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 124) almost certainly refers to \i Frankenstein, \i0 most likely to the "story" or ur-text (but possibly to the longer "book" or "novel" that she eventually began to draft into Notebook A\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 21 August 1816 below for the difficulty in determining this point).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri17\sb269\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 August 1816 MWS entries of "Write" or "write" in her Geneva Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 125-126, 129) almost certainly refer to \i Frankenstein.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri7\sb259\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 14 August 1816 According to \i MWS Journal, \i0 1,125, "[the Gothic novelist Monk] Lewis comes to Diodati" but MWS did not meet him at this time. For an incorrect association of Lewis with the earlier ghost-story competition, see 10 November 1824 below.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri7\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18, 19, 20 August 1816 MWS entered in her Geneva Journal that PBS "reads Plutarch" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,126, 129)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see also 15-28 November 1816 below for PBS reading Plutarch's \i Lives \i0 just before MWS drafted the Safie episode in which the monster read Plutarch's \i Lives.}\par }