{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1462\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1462\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1190 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Ixxxii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri26\sb626\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 12th; the MWS entries of "Work & read,\super 55\nosupersub  "work & read,\super 55\nosupersub  "walk & work\super 55\nosupersub  on 10,11, and 15 October probably referred to non-literary physical work; and the entry of "buy mourning & work in the evening\super 55\nosupersub  on the 12th suggests that MWS's "work\super 55\nosupersub  involved making up her mourning garments that very evening\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,139-141; for the last conjecture about the mourning clothes, I am indebted to Nora Crook.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri24\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 October 1816 MWS entries of "Write\super 55\nosupersub  or "write\super 55\nosupersub  in her Bath Journal almost certainly refer to her novel \i Frankenstein. \i0 (These eight days of concentrated writing [together with other hints given below] suggest that MWS at this time was drafting Walton's introductory Letters in Notebook A; the separate references to "work\super 55\nosupersub  in three of these entries [19, 22, and 23 October] again suggest that "work\super 55\nosupersub  did not refer to the writing of \i Frankenstein\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 141-142.)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx298 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  26\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx298 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart26\pnindent298\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 October 1816 PBS entered in MWS's Bath Journal that "Mary writes her book\super 55\nosupersub  (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 142). (This important and first reference to \i Frankenstein \i0 as a "book" [rather than the 12 August and 21 August 1816 references to a "story\super 55\nosupersub ] clearly means that by this time MWS was drafting her "novel\super 55\nosupersub  in Notebook A, most likely drafting Walton's introductory Letters that concern his traveling from St. Petersburgh to Archangel where he hired a vessel to sail to the north pole. The fact that MWS at this time [between 14 October and 16 November 1816] was reading Russian-travel and sea-voyage literature [including Holcroft, Anson, Ides, and other "old voyages\super 55\nosupersub\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 141-146] confirms the likelihood. It is also possible that this reading caused MWS to redraft sections of the beginning of Notebook A, which redrafting could have led to MWS discarding the now missing pages 1-40 as early as November 1816.)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx298 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  27\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx298 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart26\pnindent298\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 October 1816 MWS entered "Write Ch. 3V\sub 2\nosupersub " in her Bath Journal and then altered the entry to "Write Ch. 2V\sub 2\nosupersub " (see \i MWS Journal, \i0 I, 142; see also II, 700, for a misrepresenting note that MWS wrote "27\sub 2\nosupersub " over "3\super 55\nosupersub : the "V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  does not overlay the "3\super 55\nosupersub ; only the "2" overlays the "3\super 55\nosupersub ; and the ink and placement of "V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  in the original manuscript suggest that MWS first wrote "3V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  and then altered "3\super 55\nosupersub  to "2\super 55\nosupersub ), providing the first specific reference to where MWS was in the writing of \i Frankenstein. \i0 (Because MWS was almost certainly by this time drafting her novel in Notebook A, the following sequence best explains this journal entry. By August or September 1816, MWS had already written a shorter but now lost ur-text of her "story,\super 55\nosupersub  and by 27 October 1816 she had already formally drafted three sections of her "novel\super 55\nosupersub  \i Frankenstein \i0 in Notebook A: Walton's introductory Letters [the now missing Draft: Vol. I, Letters I-IV\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 3-6 in this edition]; the original and partially missing Draft: Vol. I, Ch. [1] [see pages 7, 10-15, 26-31, and 36-39 in this edition]; and the original and extant Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 2 [later renumbered Ch. 3\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 40-53 in this edition]. Before MWS began drafting the next chapter about Victor's first experiences at the university of Ingolstadt, she apparently decided to provide more information on Victor's scientific background: to that end she wrote all or some of a rough-draft "half chapter\super 55\nosupersub  [what she first called "Ch. 3V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  in her Journal] that detailed Victor's scientific knowledge: this "half chapter" [which is extant on six consecutive unnumbered insert pages that are now a part of Notebook A\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 16-25 and 32-35 in this edition] was apparently intended to begin Ch. 3 before MWS went on in that same chapter to describe Victor's first experiences at university, experiences that were most likely already outlined or even sketched out in the now lost ur-text of her story. She then apparently decided to interpolate this rough draft earlier in her text: to that end she canceled sections of Draft Ch. [1] into which she inserted these six rough-draft pages [which she then headed "Chapt. 2"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see transcription page 17 in this edition]; because the second "half\super 55\nosupersub  of this new "Chapt. 2\super 55\nosupersub  was the already written and remaining portion of the original Draft: Ch. [1], she altered her Journal note from "Write Ch. 3V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  to "Write Ch. 2V\sub 2\nosupersub " [that is, no longer the first "7\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  of the yet to be completed "Ch. 3\super 55\nosupersub  but now the new first "V\sub 2\nosupersub\super 55\nosupersub  (headed "Chapt. 2\super 55\nosupersub ) of an already drafted chapter. Finally, because she had added a chapter to her novel, she had to renumber her already written original "Chapter 2\super 55\nosupersub  to "Chapter 3\super 55\nosupersub  [see transcription page 41 in this edition]. All of these revisions were apparently completed before MWS wrote an unemended "Chap. 4\super 55\nosupersub  as the heading for her next chapter on Victor's university education [what would have been the third chapter if MWS had not written these six insert pages]; all of these revisions most likely took place sometime between 27 October and 4 November 1816; and some of them possibly took place on 28 October, for which see below.)}\par }