{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl597\margr1225\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn597\margrsxn1225\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7502\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9482 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 Ixxxiii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri14\sb634\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 October 1816 MWS entry of "Read the Introduction to Sir H. Davy's Chemistry-write" in her Bath Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,142) most likely refers to her drafting \i Frankenstein \i0 and probably relates to her writing the insert "Ch. 2V\sub 2\nosupersub " described in the Chronology above for 27.October 1816. (MWS continued to read Sir Humphry Davy\super 14 \nosupersub through 4 November, apparently in order to write about chemistry and "natural philosophy" in two Notebook A chapters: in the six unpaginated insert pages in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 2 [see pages 16-25 and 32-35 in this edition]; and in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 4 [see pages 54-67 in this edition].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri0\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20 November 1816 MWS entries of "Write" and "write" in her Bath journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 144-146) most likely refer to her drafting \i Frankenstein \i0 in Notebook A, and the entry on 20 November of "write (137)" almost certainly refers to her having finished page 137 in Notebook A, which is the last page of Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 12, the page that marks the end of the Justine story and concludes the first volume of \i 1818 \i0 (see transcription page 221 in this edition). (It is therefore very likely during this concentrated period of writing for twelve days or more that MWS was writing Draft: Vol. I, Chs. 4 or 5 through 12\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 54-221 in this edition. The separate references to "work" in five of these entries [as well as in four others during the same period] suggest that "work" did not refer to the writing of \i Frankenstein.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15-28 November 1816 MWS entered in her Bath journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,146-147) that PBS at this time read Plutarch's \i Lives \i0 and Milton's \i Paradise Lost \i0 (the latter, aloud to MWS), two works that the monster read at the De Laceys' cottage (see Draft: Vol. II, Ch [6], especially pages 342-349 in this edition; see also 18, 19, 20 August 1816 above.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb264\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx7910 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 November and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 December 1816\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\loch\f0\cchs0 MWS entries of "Write"}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri10\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 or "write" in her Bath Journal most likely refer to her drafting \i Frankenstein \i0 in Notebook A. (It is likely during this concentrated period of writing for fifteen days or more that MWS was writing Draft: Vol. I, Chs. 13-14 and Vol. II, Chs. l-[4], all or most of which was drafted in Notebook A [see 5 December 1816 below; see also pages 222-313 in this edition; and note that as late as November/December 1816 MWS still conceived of her novel as a two-volume work, Volume II of which dramatically opened with the monster's monologue]. The separate references in three of these entries to "Work after tea" on 24 November and to "work in the evening" on 27 November and 2 December again suggest that "work" did not refer to the writing of \i Frankenstein\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see MWS \i Journal, \i0 1,147-148.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 5 December 1816 MWS wrote to PBS that "I have also finished the 4 Chap, of Frankenstein which is a very long one & I think you would like it" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 22),\super 15\nosupersub  which is most likely a reference to the now missing Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [4] that probably occupied about thirty pages in Notebook A (or, possibly, Notebook B)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 previous draft chapters in Notebook A occupied anywhere from six to twelve pages. (Whether or not PBS liked the chapter, it appears that the "very long" and now missing Draft Vol. II, Ch. [4] was reduced by MWS and/or PBS into what became the much shorter \i 1818: \i0 Vol. II, Ch. V [the chapter on Safie's arrival and her language instruction\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see pages 312-313 in this edition]. The "trauma" in the text at this point also involved the following chapter on the history of Safie and her father\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 the extant but revised Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], which became \i 1818: \i0 Vol. II, Ch. VI [see pages 314-341 in this edition]. Because MWS probably revised this Ch. [5] in April 1817 [see 10-17 April 1817 below; see also transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition], by which time she had finished the draft of her novel in Notebooks A and B, it is possible that she revised and drastically shortened the "very long" Ch. [4] at the same time. It is also possible that she corrected part of these two chapters as late as 29 April while she was fair copying her Draft\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 29 April 1817 below.\super 16\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri2\sb257\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 December 1816 MWS entries of "Write" and "write" in her Bath Journal most likely refer to her drafting \i Frankenstein \i0 in Notebooks A and/or B. (If Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [4] was completed by 5 December [see that date above], MWS during this concentrated period of writing for 7 days or more may have written Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5] in Notebook A [or, possibly, Notebook B] and then continued her narrative in Notebook B with Draft: Vol. II, Chs. [6], 7, and 8 [this estimate of writing four chapters or thirty-four pages during these seven days is based on MWS averaging approximately five pages/day during each day she drafted Notebooks A and B: 7 x 5 = 35]. Once}\par }