{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1443\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1443\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Ixxxviii       \i0\scaps The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri46\sb634\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22 August 1817 PBS from Marlow wrote to Messrs. Lackington, Allen & Co. and proposed that they publish \i Frankenstein \i0 at half-profits: "I ought to have mentioned that the novel which I sent you is not my own production, but that of a friend who not being at present in England cannot make the correction you suggest. As to any mere inaccuracies of language I should feel myself authorized to amend them when revising proofs. With respect to the terms of publication, my first wish certainly was to receive on my friend's behalf an adequate price for the copyright of the MS. As it is, however, I beg to submit the following proposal, which I hope you will think fair, particularly as I understand it is an arrangement frequently made by Booksellers with Authors who are new to the world.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 It is that you should take the risk of printing, advertising, etc., entirely on yourselves and, after full deduction being made from the profits of the work to cover these expenses that the clear produce, both of the first edition and of every succeeding edition should be divided between you and the author. I cannot in [on] the author's part disclaim all interest in the first edition, because it is possible that there may be no demand for another, and then the profits, however small, will be all that will accrue. \i %l \i0 hope on consideration that you will not think such an arrangement as this unreasonable, or one to which you will refuse your assent" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 I, 553). (This important letter indicates, among other things, [1] that PBS sometime between 7 and 21 August submitted the Fair-Copy Notebooks to Lackington without revealing that MWS was the author; [2] that the publisher had agreed to publish the novel, declined to purchase its copyright, and even suggested that the author defer profits until a 2d edition was published; [3] that PBS suggested the alternative of half-profits for the first edition, a proposal that eventually resulted in the author receiving one-third-profits\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see 1 January 1818 below; [4] that the publisher had also suggested a substantial "correction" that PBS sidestepped; and [5] that PBS would oversee all or most of the transactions [including proofs and revises] between MWS and the publisher.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri43\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [Pearly September] 1817 "Marlow, September, 1817." was the place and date appended to the \i 1818 \i0 Preface when it was republished in \i 1831 \i0 (pages 1-2; see also transcription page 2 in this edition), and MWS in the \i 1831 \i0 Introduction (page xi) claimed that "As far as I can recollect, it [the preface] was entirely written by him [PBS]." (If MWS's recollection was correct, then it is likely that she discarded her own preface that she apparently wrote on 14 May 1817 [see that date above].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb283\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 2 September 1817      MWS and PBS's daughter Clara Everina Shelley was born.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri34\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [P2-19] September 1817 In a cumulative entry for 2-19 September in her Marlow Journal, MWS recorded not only that she was "confined," having given birth to Clara on the 2d, but also that PBS did "Bargain with Lackington concerning Frankenstein" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 179-180). (Although PBS was not successful in negotiating an agreement for half-profits [see 22 August 1817 above], he seems to have bargained at this time for the agreement of one-third-profits that earned the Shelleys \loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'a3\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 41.13s.l0d. [see 1 January 1818 below].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri0\sb250\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 24 September 1817 By this time \i Frankenstein \i0 was apparently being printed because proofs had already been sent to Marlow. When PBS went up to London with Claire Clairmont on 23 September, he may have taken a proof of a portion from \i 1818: \i0 Vol. I. By 24 September he used the inside address of "Mr. Leigh Hunt's,/!3 Lisson Grove North" when he wrote to "Messrs. Lackington \i &c \i0 Co." and begged "to inform them that he expects to remain in Town for a week or fortnight and that during that \{Prime\} the proofs may be addressed as a\{bove\}" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 1,556). But apparently another proof was on its way to Marlow, for later that night on [?24] September MWS wrote to PBS that she would "send you my dearest another proof\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 which arrived tonight in looking it over there appeared to me some abruptnesses which I have endeavoured to supply\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 but I am tired and not very clear headed so I give you carte blanche to make what alterations you please" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 42). (These "abruptnesses" [corrected by either MWS or PBS], which were most likely early in \i 1818: \i0 Vol. I, may have been in Walton's introductory Letters I-IV. Because these letters exist in neither Draft nor Fair Copy, it is impossible to determine where any revisions to these proofs might have been made. However, there is a possibility that PBS used this \i carte blanche \i0 to remove one of the "abruptnesses" by adding a passage in an early section of the proofs, what had been the beginning of Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 2. The added passage [see transcription page 17 in this edition for \i 1818: \i0 Vol. I, Ch. I, lines 1-10] is almost certainly PBS's: "I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood. . . . But, in drawing the}\par }