{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1438\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1438\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1198 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 xcvi\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri48\sb610\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 385, as "a tissue of horrible and disgusting absurdity. \expndtw29 ...\expndtw0  It is piously dedicated to Mr. Godwin, and is written in the spirit of his school. The dreams of insanity are embodied in the strong and striking language of the insane, and the author, notwithstanding the rationality of his preface, often leaves us in doubt whether he is not as mad as his hero. Mr. Godwin is the patriarch of a literary family, whose chief skill is in delineating the wanderings of the intellect, and which strangely delights in the most afflicting and humiliating of human miseries. His disciples are a kind of \i out-pensioners of Bedlam, \i0 and, like 'Mad Bess' or 'Mad Tom,' are occasionally visited with paroxysms of genius and fits of expression, which make sober-minded people wonder and shudder. . . . f . . . The author has powers, both of conception and language, which employed in a happier direction might, perhaps, (we speak dubiously,) give him a name among those whose writings amuse or amend their fellow-creatures." (For the publication date of this January 1818 review, see 20 June 1818 below; for a photofacsimile of this review, see \i Romantics Reviewed, \i0 II, 764-767; for partial reprintings of this review, see Grylls, page 316; \i 1818 Macdonald, \i0 pages 312-313; \i 1818 Hunter, \i0 pages 187-190.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri43\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 14 June 1818 MWS in Bagni di Lucca wrote to Walter Scott to thank him for the favourable notice he wrote in \i Blackwood's \i0 (see 20 March/1 April 1818 above) and "to express the pleasure I receive from approbation of so high a value as yours, f M\super r\nosupersub  Shelley soon after its publication took the liberty of sending you a copy but as both he and I thought in a manner which would prevent you from supposing that he was the author we were surprised therefore to see him mentioned in the notice as the probable author,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I am anxious to prevent your continuing in the mistake of supposing M\super r\nosupersub  Shelley guilty of a juvenile attempt of mine; to which\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 from its being written at an early age, I abstained from putting my name\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and from respect to those persons from whom I bear it. I have therefore kept it concealed except from a few friends" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 71).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi358\ri31\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Peacock from Marlow wrote to PBS in Bagni di Lucca that \i "Frankenstein \i0 is reviewed in the new Number of the \i Quarterly, \i0 but in no very friendly style," that the "\i Gentleman'\i0 s \i Magazine \i0 has a brief commendatory notice of \i Frankenstein," \i0 and that "All parties concur in praising the scenery of \i Frankenstein" \{Peacock Works, \i0 VIII, 194-196). (For these reviews [which Peacock planned to ship to the Shelleys in another parcel], see [?] April and 12 June 1818 above.)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri36\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx288 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  20\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri36\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx288 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent276\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1818 William Godwin from London wrote to MWS in Bagni di Lucca that he saw "a fortnight ago, an announcement that 'Frankenstein' would be reviewed in the next 'Quarterly Review,' to be published June 12. I was therefore anxious to see the numbers, lest they might mention names, or say anything else that might be painful to me. But the article is very innocent. They say that the \i gentleman \i0 who has written the book is a \i man of talents," \i0 but that he employs his powers in a way disagreeable to them. They do not, however, pretend to find anything blasphemous in the story" \i \{Shelley and Mary, \i0 II, 290A).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri34\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx288 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  21\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri34\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx288 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart20\pnindent276\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1818 Maria Gisborne, writing from Leghorn to MWS in Bagni di Lucca, humorously remarked that she "would not give [Mr. Bilby] 'Frankenstein'; as he is a solitary man, we were fearful of the effect it might produce on his \i imagination!" \{Gisborne & Williams, \i0 page 52).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li29\fi0\ri24\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1,2 July 1818 London \i Times \i0 twice advertised \i Frankenstein \i0 (page 4, column 4), thereby indicating that Lackington and/or individual booksellers still had unsold copies of the novel in quires or in boards\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 for even a later advertisement, see 15, 26 August 1818 below.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li29\fi0\ri19\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 5 July 1818 Peacock from Marlow wrote to PBS in Bagni di Lucca that he had "sent off a small box directed to Mr. Gisborne for you, containing . . . the \i Edinburgh \i0 and \i Quarterly Reviews \i0 [and] \i Constable's Magazine, \i0 which contains a notice of \i Frankenstein" \{Peacock Works, \i0 VIII, 196). (For these reviews in the \i Quarterly \i0 and in Constable's \i Edinburgh Magazine, \i0 see [?] March and 12 June 1818 above.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li31\fi0\ri0\sb252\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 25 July 1818 PBS from Bagni di Lucca wrote to Godwin in London that "I hear that poor Mary's book is attacked most violently in the Quarterly review\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 We have heard some praise of it, & among others an article of Walter Scott's in Blackwoods Magazine" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 II, 23).}\par }