{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl649\margr1168\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn649\margrsxn1168\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7646\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9617 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 xcvii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi358\ri34\sb590\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 On the same day PBS wrote to Peacock in Marlow that \i "Frankenstein \i0 seems to have been well received; for although the unfriendly criticism of the \i Quarterly \i0 is an evil for it, yet it proves that it is read in some considerable degree, and it would be difficult for them, with any appearance of fairness, to deny it merit altogether" (PBS \i Letters, \i0 II, 26).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri29\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15, 26 August 1818 The \i Morning Chronicle \i0 on these dates (both page 1, column 5) published advertisements for \i Frankenstein \i0 in which was quoted part of Walter Scott's review from \i Blackwood's. \i0 These advertisements, like those of 1 and 2 July 1818 (see dates above) in the \i Times, \i0 suggest that there were still copies of \i Frankenstein \i0 for sale by Lackington and some other booksellers.\super 37}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri26\sb259\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?19] August 1818 PBS from Florence wrote to MWS in Bagni di Lucca, asked if she were "very lonely," and indicated that he would be "flattered . . . above all by seeing \{such\} fruits of my absence as were produced when \{we were\} at Geneva " (PBS \i Letters, \i0 II, 3 3) ,\super 38\nosupersub  thereby confirming that MWS had begun writing her story about Victor Frankenstein while PBS and Byron took their boat tour around Lake Geneva (see 22-30 June 1816 above).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri29\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 30 August 1818 Peacock from Marlow wrote to PBS in Italy that at the Egham races he "met on the course a great number of my old acquaintance, by the reading portion of whom I was asked a multitude of questions concerning \i Frankenstein \i0 and its author. It seems to be universally known and read. The criticism of the \i Quarterly, \i0 though unfriendly, contained many admissions of its merit, and must on the whole have done it service" \i (Peacock Works, \i0 VIII, 203).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2\fi0\ri0\sb278\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 24 September 1818   MWS and PBS's daughter Clara Everina Shelley died in Venice.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 24 October 1818 MWS entered in her Este Journal that she "read the Quarterly" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 233), namely, the January 1818 issue of the \i Quarterly Review \i0 (published in June) that contained Croker's review of \i Frankenstein \i0 (see 12 June and 5 July 1818 above).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri22\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 12 November 1818 Leigh Hunt from London wrote to the Shelleys in Italy that he "forgot, in my box-letter, to allude to the criticism in the Quart. Rev. upon Marina's [MWS's] book. Upon the whole, I congratulate her on it, as far as they unde<    >nd her" \i (SC, \i0 VI, 740; also printed in \i Hunt Correspondence, \i0 I, 125).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li10\fi0\ri22\sb262\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 20 December 1818 MWS entry of "Correct Frankenstein" in her Naples Journal (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 245) suggests that she was emending the text in one of her copies of \i 1818, \i0 possibly in \i 1818 Thomas, \i0 the annotated copy of \i Frankenstein \i0 that MWS eventually gave to a Mrs. Thomas in Genoa in or before July 1823.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri0\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 April 1819 John William Polidori's vampire story that had been conceived during the Geneva summer of 1816 was published under the title of "The Vampyre: A Tale by Lord Byron" in Henry Colburn's \i New Monthly Magazine \i0 XI (1 April 1819): 193-206, and was prefaced by an "Extract of a Letter from Geneva, with Anecdotes of Lord Byron, &c." (most likely written by John Mitford). Both tale and preface were also published in book form by Sherwood, Neely, and Jones, and in both published versions the preface writer rehearsed the circumstances of the ghost-story competition: he named his source as "the Countess of Breuss, a Russian lady," who had been visited that summer by Polidori; he freed Byron "from one imputation attached to him\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 of having in his house two sisters as the partakers of his revels"; he explained that these two sisters merely visited Diodati and that it was the atheist "Mr. Percy Bysshe Shelley [who] resided with Miss M. W. Godwin and Miss Clermont, (the daughters of the celebrated Mr. Godwin)"; he summarized the \i Christabel \i0 incident (see 18 June 1816 above); and he indicated that the Countess of Breuss "had in her possession the outline of each" of the stories "undertaken by Lord B., the physician [Polidori] and Miss M. W. Godwin," the last story footnoted to have "already appeared under the title of 'Frankenstein, or the modern Prometheus.'" (For more information and for Godwin's response to this prefatory letter, see 3 and 6 April 1819 below.)}\par }