{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1450\margr360\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1450\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li19\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1212 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs22 xcviii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\expndtw-3\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri14\sb624\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 3 and 6 April 1819 William Godwin, angered by the prefatory remarks about himself and MWS, wrote two letters on 3 April to the publisher William Sherwood to object to the "passage full of the grossest & most unmanly reflections on my daughter\super 55\nosupersub  and to recommend that the passages about MWS and Claire Clairmont be canceled from the book. After being informed by Sherwood that he had published \i The Vampyre \i0 for Henry Colburn, Godwin complained to Colburn in a letter of 6 April and then met with one of Colburn's assistants in order to arrange that the offensive passages be canceled.\super 39}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri19\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx178 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }April 1819 In answering Leigh Hunt's letter of 9 March 1819 (see \i SC, \i0 VI, 790-793), MWS in Rome referred\line to her novel when she quipped that she had "written a book in <favor> defence of Polypheme\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 have I not?\super 55\nosupersub  (MWS\line \i Letters, \i0 I, 91).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri19\sb269\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 30 April 1819 Leigh Hunt in a letter to his fellow poet, John Hamilton Reynolds, indicated that he had "also requested him [his nephew Henry L. Hunt] to send you Frankenstein, which happened to be in his hands\super 55\nosupersub  (SC, VI, 806).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri7\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15 May 1819 Byron from Venice wrote to his publisher John Murray in London that "Mary Godwin (now Mrs. Shelley) wrote 'Frankenstein\super 5\nosupersub\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 which you [in Murray's \i Quarterly Review\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see 12 June 1818 above] have reviewed thinking it Shelley's\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 methinks it is a wonderful work for a Girl of nineteen\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\i\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 not \i0 nineteen indeed\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 at that time.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I enclose you the beginning of mine\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 by which you will see how far it resembles Mr. Colburn's publication.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 If you choose to publish it in the Edinburgh Magazine \i (Wilsons &c Blackwoods) \i0 you may\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\i\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 stating why^ \i0 & with such explanatory proem as you please.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 I never went on with it\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 as you will perceive by the date [17 June 1816\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see that date above]\super 55\nosupersub  \i (Byron L&J, \i0 VI, 126).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb286\sa0\tx178 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 7{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }June 1819      MWS and PBS's son William Shelley died in Rome.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb264\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 19 July 1819 Four days after Cantos I and II of Byron's \i Don Juan \i0 were published, William Hone published \i Don Juan: With \i0 . . . \i Anecdotes of his Lordship's \i0 . . . \i Residence \i0 . . . \i at Geneva \i0 . . . \i Including\i0 ... A \i Sketch of the Vampyre Family \i0 (London: William Wright, 1819), a parody that demonstrates how much \i Frankenstein \i0 was part of the public consciousness after \i The Vampyre \i0 scandal: in the parody, Lord Harold went to Geneva and}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2851\fi0\ri0\sb245\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 In rival conclave there and dark divan}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2849\fi413\ri2918\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 He met and mingled with the Vampyre crew Who hate the virtues and the form of man,}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2851\fi410\ri2918\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 And strive to bring fresh monsters into view; Who mock the inscrutable Almighty's plan}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2854\fi406\ri3283\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 By seeking truth and order to subdue\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Scribblers, who fright the novel reading train With mad creations of the unsettled brain.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2858\fi0\ri0\sb144\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There Frankenstein was hatched\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 the wretch abhorred,}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2858\fi406\ri2554\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Whom shuddering Sh\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 y saw in horrid dream Plying his task where human bones are stored,}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2863\fi406\ri2554\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 And there the Vampyre quaffed the living stream From beauty's veins\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 such sights could joy afford}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li2861\fi408\ri2554\sb0\sa0\sl-238\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 To this strange coterie, glorying in each theme, That wakes disgust in other minds\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\scaps\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 lord harold \scaps0 Sung wildly too, but none knew what he carolled.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li34\fi0\ri0\sb235\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 In the notes to this passage, Hone rebuked "that knot of scribblers, male and female, with weak nerves, and disordered brains, from whom have sprung those disgusting compounds of unnatural conception, bad taste, and}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li36\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 absurdity, entitled 'Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus,' the 'Vampyre,\super 5\nosupersub  &cc, &c."\super 40}\par }