{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1472\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1472\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li1193\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri29\sb638\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Theatre (English Opera House) in London for a run of 37 performances (Forry, page 121; see also pages 135-160 for a text of this play).\super 42}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri22\sb274\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 11 August 1823 William Godwin entered in his Diary for this date "Frankenstein, 2.\super d\nosupersub Edition," referring to the second London edition ("A New Edition") of \i Frankenstein \i0 that was published in two volumes, 12mo., by G. and W. B. Whittaker in an unknown but probably small number (?250; ?500) of copies and priced at 14s. in boards (this publication date is confirmed by an advertisement in the \i Morning Chronicle \i0 on 11 August 1823, page 1, column 3). (All of the advertisements as well as the title page named the author as Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. The copy text for this reset \i 1823 \i0 edition was \i 181 8,\super 43\nosupersub  \i0 most likely as corrected by Godwin. Murray, " Changes," pages 320-323, lists 114 substantive textual variants in \i 1823, \i0 and \i 1818 Crook \i0 records 9 additional variants [see page xcvi].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri19\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 14 August 1823 MWS from Paris wrote to Leigh and Marianne Hunt in Florence that Horace Smith had just visited but "does not know much English News, except that they brought out Frankenstein at the Lyceum and vivified the Monster in such a manner as caused the ladies to faint away & a hubbub to ensue\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 however they diminished the horrors in the sequel, & it is having a run" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 369)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see 28 July 1823 above.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri22\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18 August 1823 MWS from Paris wrote to Leigh Hunt in Florence that "Going to the fountain head of the knowledge [to the playwright James Kenney, who apparently was the source of Horace Smith's information on 14 August] I found that it was not true that the ladies were frightened at the first appearance of Frankenstein\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 K. says that the first appearance of the Monster from F.'s labratory down a dark staircase had a fine effect\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 but the piece fell off afterwards\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 though it is having a run" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 374).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7\fi353\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Henry M. Milner's \i Frankenstein; or, The Demon of Switzerland \i0 opened at the Royal Coburg Theatre in London for a run of eight performances (Forry, page 121).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri24\sb264\sa0\sl-254\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 29 August 1823 MWS, having returned to London on 25 August 1823, went to the Lyceum to see Peake's \i Presumption; or, The Fate of Frankenstein \i0 (see 9 September 1823 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri17\sb264\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 September 1823 \i Humgumption; or Dr. Frankenstein and the Hob goblin ofHoxton \i0 opened at the New Surrey Theatre for a run of six performances (Forry, page 121).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li5\fi360\ri0\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Presumption and the Blue Demon \i0 opened at Davis's Royal Amphitheatre for a run of two performances (Forry, page 121).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri0\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 9 September 1823 MWS from London wrote to Leigh Hunt in Florence that "lo & behold! I found myself famous!\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 Frankenstein had prodigious success as a drama & was about to be repeated for the 23\super rd\nosupersub  night at the}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tlhyph\tx9485 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 English opera house. The play bill amused me extremely, for in the list of dramatis personam came,{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }by M\super r}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri7\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 T. Cooke: this nameless mode of naming the un\{n\}ameable is rather good. On Friday Aug. 29\super th\nosupersub  Jane My father William & I went to the theatre to see it. Wallack looked very well as F \i [Frankenstein]\i0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 he is at the beginning full of hope \i &c \i0 expectation\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 at the end of the I\super st\nosupersub  Act. the stage represents a room with a staircase leading to F workshop\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 he goes to it and you see his light at a small window, through which a frightened servant peeps, who runs off in terror when F. exclaims "It lives!"\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 Presently F himself rushes in horror & trepidation from the room and while}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tlhyph\tx3737 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 still expressing his agony & terror{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }throws down the door of the laboratory, leaps the staircase & presents}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li12\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tlhyph\tx9511 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 his unearthly & monstrous person on the stage. The story is not well managed\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 but Cooke played{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }'s part}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri2\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 extremely well\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 his seeking as it were for support\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 his trying to grasp at the sounds he heard\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 all indeed he does was well imagined & executed. I was much amused, & it appeared to excite a breathless eagerness in the audience\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97 \hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 it was a third piece a scanty pit filled at half price\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 & all stayed till it was over. They continue to play it even now. . . . <][On the strength of the drama my father had published \ul for mv benefit\ul0  a new edition of F." (MWS \i Letters, \i0 1,378-379).\super 44\nosupersub  (For information on the play and on the new edition, see 22 July, 28 July, and 11 August 1823 above.)}\par }