{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl611\margr1242\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn611\margrsxn1242\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7922\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9902 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\expndtw-2\loch\f0\cchs0 ci}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri22\sb624\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 11 September 1823 \i London Literary Gazette \i0 reported that the English Opera House's \i\super cc\nosupersub  Frankenstein \i0 continues to drag on its spectral existence and to scare the children" (page 590).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri22\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 20 October 1823 Richard Brinsley Peake's \i Another Piece of Presumption \i0 opened at the Adelphi Theatre for a run of nine performances (Forry, page 121; see also pages 161-176 for a text of this play).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri17\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 14 November 1823 MWS in London wrote to Sir Richard Phillips that "I have great respect for that faculty we carry about us called \ul Mind\ul0\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and I fear that no Frankenstein can so arrange the gases as to be able to make any combination of them produce thought or even life" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 401).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri14\sb266\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 26 November 1823 Henry Crabb Robinson noted in his diary after taking tea and supping at Godwin's that MWS "looks elegant and sickly and young. One would not suppose she was the author of 'Frankenstein'" \i (Robinson Diary, \i0 I, 494).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri5\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 16 March 1824 In a debate on the "Amelioration of the Condition of the Slave Population of the West Indies" in the House of Commons, George Canning remarked that "In dealing with the negro, Sir, we must remember that we are dealing with a being possessing the form and strength of a man, but the intellect only of a child. To turn him loose in the manhood of his physical strength, in the maturity of his physical passions, but in the infancy of his uninstructed reason, would be to raise up a creature resembling the splendid fiction of a recent romance; the hero of which constructs a human form, with all the corporeal capabilities of man, and with the thews and sinews of a giant; but being unable to impart to the work of his hands a perception of right and wrong, he finds too late that he has only created a more than mortal power of doing mischief, and himself recoils from the monster which he has made" (Hansard, column 1103 ).\super 45\nosupersub  (For MWS's reaction to these remarks, which somewhat distort the meaning of \i Frankenstein, \i0 see 22 March 1824 and 20 August 1827 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri14\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\i0\b\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 22'March \b0 1824 MWS in London wrote to Edward John Trelawny in Greece that the House of Commons was "introducing some ammelioration in the state of the slaves in some parts of the West Indies\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 during the debate on that subject [George] Canning paid a compliment to Frankenstein in a manner sufficiently pleasing to me" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 417). (For Canning's remark and for MWS's later reaction, see 16 March 1824 above and 20 August 1827 below.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri2\sb257\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 31 July 1824\super 46\nosupersub  The reviewer(s) in "The Anniversary" section \i oi Knight's Quarterly Magazine \i0 3 (August 1824): 195-199, used MWS's latest novel \i Valperga \i0 as an excuse to offer an extended analysis of \i Frankenstein, \i0 which despite its "faults of. . . occasional extravagance and \i over-writing" \i0 was "the best instance of natural passions applied to supernatural events. . . . ^But whence arises the extreme inferiority of Valperga? I can account for it only by supposing that Shelley wrote the first, though it was attributed to his wife,\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and that she really wrote the last. Still I should not, from internal evidence, suppose Frankenstein to be the work of Shelley. It has much of his poetry and vigour\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 but it is wholly free from those philosophical opinions from which scarcely any of his works \i are \i0 free, and for which there are many fair openings in Frankenstein. It is equally to be observed that there are no religious reflections\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 and that there are many circumstances in which a mind at all religiously inclined would not have failed to have expressed some sentiments of that nature. It may be, that Mrs. Shelley wrote Frankenstein\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 but, knowing that its fault was extravagance, determined to be careful and correct in her next work; and, thence, as so many do from the same cause, became cold and common-place. At all events, the difference of the two books is very remarkable." (For a photofacsimile of this review and for the names of some of the staff writers, see \i Romantics Reviewed, \i0 II, 498-500 and 491; for a partial reprinting, see \i\expndtw16 1818\expndtw0  Hunter, \i0 pages 197-200.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri0\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 10 November 1824 MWS from Kentish Town wrote to John Cam Hobhouse that "the Preface to Frankenstein proves that that story was conceived \ul before\ul0  Lord Byron's and Shelley's tour round the lake [see 22-30 June 1816 above], and that [Monk] Lewis did not arrive in Geneva until some time \ul after\ul0 " (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 455). (MWS was}\par }