{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1471\margr360\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1471\margrsxn360\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1198 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 cii\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri12\sb638\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 responding to \b Hobhouse's \b0 request for information in his defense of Byron against the slanders and errors in recent books by R. C. Dallas \i [Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron, \i0 1824] and by Thomas Medwin \i [Journal of the Conversations of Lord Byron, \i0 1824]. Hobhouse thanked MWS in a letter of 12 November 1824 \i [Shelley and Mary, \i0 IV, 1188] and used her information to correct Medwin in his review of these two books in \i Westminster Review \i0 III [January 1825]: 1-34.\super 47\nosupersub )}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li12\fi0\ri19\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 13 December 1824 \i Frank-in-Steam; or, The Modern Promise to Pay \i0 opened at the Olympic Theatre for a run of four performances (Forry, page \b 121; \b0 see pages 177-186 for a text of this play).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri0\sb269\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx286 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }November 1825 MWS from Kentish Town wrote to Charles Oilier (who worked for the publisher Henry\line Colburn) that "The title of my book is to be simply The Last Man, a Romance, by the Author of Frankenstein\super 5\nosupersub "\line (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 504), an identification that MWS used for many of her other publications. (The "Author of\line Frankenstein" was undoubtedly good for sales, but MWS's father-in-law. Sir Timothy Shelley, had also made it\line a condition of her repayable allowance that she would not bring PBS's name before the public\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 this prohibition\line seems to have affected the way some of her own works were identified.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri12\sb266\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 4 April 1826 Date of an apparent re-issue of the 2d edition of the \i 1823 Frankenstein \i0 (see 11 August 1823 above) by Henry Colburn and priced at 14s. (subscribed at 9s.l0d.)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 see Colburn's "Handlist of Publications Issued From New Burlington Street and From Conduit Street From January 1818 To August 1829," Bentley Archives, University of Illinois Library (microfilm reel #10); see also advertisement of "Just Published, . . . Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus. 2 vols. 12s." at the end of MWS \i The Last Man \i0 (London: Henry Colburn, 1826), III, 352. (Because no copy of this \i [1826] Frankenstein \i0 with a new Colburn title page has ever surfaced, it is likely that Colburn merely purchased and sold Whittaker's remaining and unaltered stock of the \i 1823 \i0 novel\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 together with the stock of \i Valperga, \i0 which was also listed and advertised with \i Frankenstein. \i0 However, a collation of multiple copies of the \i 1823 Frankenstein \i0 might yield a different conclusion, namely, that there is a distinct \i [1826] \i0 text that merely masquerades as an \i 1823 \i0 one.)}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri19\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx278 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  10\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri19\sb264\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx278 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent276\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1826 Jean Toussaint Merle and Antoine Nicolas Beread's \i Le Monstre et le magicien \i0 opened at the Theatre de la Porte Saint-Martin in Paris for a run of 94 performances (Forry, page 121).\super 48}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx278 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  11\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri10\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx278 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart10\pnindent276\pnf2}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 June 1826 MWS from Kentish Town wrote to the American playwright John Howard Payne in Paris and asked "How goes on Frankenstein of Porte S\super r\nosupersub  Martini [sic]?" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 I, 521). (For additional information on this production of \i Le Monstre \i0 [with the actor Thomas Potter Cooke], see Forry, pages 11-12.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri17\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 3 July 1826 \dbch\af2\loch\af0\hich\f0\cchs0 \u9632\'3f\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0  " Henry M. Milner's \i The Man and the Monster; or, The Fate of Frankenstein \i0 opened at the Royal Coburg Theatre for a run of eight performances (Forry, page \b 121; \b0 see also pages 187-204 for a text of Milner's \i Frankenstein; or, The Man and the Monster).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri2\sb257\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 9 \i0 October 1826 John Kerr's \i The Monster and the Magician; or, The Fate of Frankenstein \i0 opened at the New Royal West London Theatre for a run of \b [?four] \b0 performances (Forry, page 122; see also pages 205-226 for a text of this play, an "Original Translation from the French").}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri5\sb259\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx286 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 16{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }January \b [?1827] \b0 MWS from Kentish Town wrote to [?Charles Oilier] (who worked for the publisher Henry\line Colburn): "I suppose there is no chance now of his [Colburn] purchasing the Copy right of Frankenstein" (MWS\line \i Letters, \i0 I, 539). This remark about Colburn not "now" purchasing the copyright suggests that it may be related\line to Colburn having recently purchased the remaining stock of Whittaker's \i 1823 \i0 edition [see 4 April 1826 above].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri2\sb250\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 20 August 1827 MWS from Sompting wrote to Teresa Guiccioli in Ravenna about George Canning: "Sapete che ha lodato il Mio Frankenstein nel House of Commons nei termini onorevole\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 gratissimi a me" (MWS \i Letters,}\par }