{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl656\margr1149\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn656\margrsxn1149\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li7807\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx9785 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\scaps0\i\loch\f0\cchs0 ciii}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri55\sb624\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 I, 564; translated on page \i 566 \i0 as "Did you know that he praised my Frankenstein in honorable terms in the House of Commons\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 extremely pleasing to me"). (For Canning's remark and for MWS's earlier reaction, see 16 March and 22 March 1824 above.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri53\sb266\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 18 February 1831 MWS in London wrote to Charles Oilier (who now worked as the chief literary adviser for the new partnership of the publishers Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley at New Burlington Street) and asked "Have they any idea of publishing Frankenstein in their edition" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 II, 128), that is, in the new Bentley's "Standard Novels" series.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri48\sb259\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 30 June 1831 MWS in London wrote to [PCharles Oilier] that "You made me an offer from Mess. Colburn & Bentley concerning the publication of Frankenstein to which I acceded. Is it their intention to conclude that affair? If it is, you would much oblige me by <tell> communicating with me about it as <you> soon as you can\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 You promised me so to do early this week\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 <If> It is of consequence to both parties that there should be no further delay" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 III, 415).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi0\ri41\sb257\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 3 September 1831 The \i Morning Chronicle \i0 (page 1, column 2), in an advertisement for Jane Porter's \i The Scottish Chiefs, \i0 announced that "Mrs. Shelley's popular Romance, Frankenstein, Revised by the Author, with a New Introduction explanatory of the origin of the Story; and the Castle of Otranto, with a Life of Horace Walpole, written by Sir Walter Scott, will appear in an early volume." (This was the earliest advertisement for the forthcoming \i 1831 \i0 edition that was published in the Standard Novels series issued by the publishers Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley. [Colburn's own \i Court Journal \i0 repeated the substance of this advertisement on 10,17, and 24 September, pages 632,648,664]. When \i Frankenstein \i0 was eventually published in #9 of Colburn and Bentley's Standard Novels series on 31 October 1831 [see that date below], the volume did not include Walpole's \i The Castle of Otranto; \i0 instead, Standard Novels #9 yoked together \i Frankenstein \i0 and Volume I of Frederick Schiller's \i The Ghost-Seer \i0 [Volume II of which occupied the Standard Novels #10].)\super 49}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri38\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 28 September 1831 MWS in London wrote to Charles Oilier and "should so like to know what is doing & when I am to receive the 12 copies &c if you will not call on me I must on you Which is not right" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 II, 145). (This request for the twelve copies promised to the author by the publishers could refer either to \i 1831 Frankenstein \i0 or to Trelawny's \i Adventures of a Younger Son \i0 that MWS was also seeing through the press at this time.)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri19\sb252\sa0\sl-264\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 8 October 1831 Colburn's \i Court Journal \i0 (page \i 696) \i0 repeated its earlier advertisements of \i The Scottish Chiefs \i0 (which included the announcement of \i Frankenstein), \i0 but this time the MWS novel was to "appear on the 1st of November" (see, however, 31 October 1831 below).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri14\sb247\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 10 October 1831 The \i Morning Chronicle \i0 (page 1, column 4) once again advertised \i TheScottish Chiefs \i0 with the announcement of the forthcoming \i Frankenstein, \i0 but this time with the new information that "The Castle of Otranto is, for the present, postponed" and that it would be replaced by "The Ghost Seer, by Schiller, with a Biographical & Critical Sketch."}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi350\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 According to Edmund Oilier, the son of Shelley's publisher Charles Oilier, "Mrs. Shelley, when a reprint of her 'Frankenstein' was coming out in Colburn and Bentley's 'Standard Novels,' and some further matter was required to make up the volume, said she would be content with nothing else than 'Inesilla,' though in the end she was obliged to be satisfied with a translation of Schiller's \super\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'a3\nosupersub\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Ghost-seer'" (Oilier, page 249). (Charles Ollier's supernatural tale had been published in his \i Inesilla, Or the Tempter, A Romance; with Other Tales \i0 [London: E. Lloyd; Edinburgh: William Blackwood, 1824].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li38\fi0\ri24\sb247\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 15 October 1831 MWS apparently wrote or finished her "Introduction" (signed \i "London, October \i0 15. 1831.") to the \i 1831 Frankenstein \i0 on this date.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li29\fi355\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The \i Morning Chronicle \i0 (page 4, column 5) published a "paragraph" (i.e., a "puff" probably paid for by the publishers Colburn and Bentley\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f2\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af2\loch\f0\cchs0 Colburn was master of the "puff" or advertisement masquerading as news) that}\par }