{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch1{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f5\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f7\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f8\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f9\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f10\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f11\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f12\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f13\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f14\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f15\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f16\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f1\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl610\margr722\margt1440\margb720 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn8487\margrsxn722\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols2\colno1\colw1228\colsr751\colno2\colw720 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\scaps\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Chronology}\par \column \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li0\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 cv}\par \sect\sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn610\margrsxn722\margtsxn1440\margbsxn720\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li2\fi0\ri526\sb624\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 the thoughtfulness born of feeling, a keen perception of the ridiculous, or a touching appeal to sympathy. Not one of all these is the characteristic of the work before us; it appeals to fear, not love; and, contrary to the general \i materiel \i0 in the writings of women, has less of the heart in it than the mind. The character of the enthusiastic young student, with whom knowledge is a passion, is powerfully drawn; and we know, in all our imaginative literature, few scenes more appalling than where Frankenstein is pursuing his monstrous and vindictive enemy over the frozen deserts of the ocean. We remember being greatly struck with this work on its first appearance: and our second reading has revived all our early impressions: the romantic excitement of its pages well repays their perusal. We should recommend them on the same principle that physicians prescribe alteratives. A clever frontispiece represents the moment when Frankenstein rushes away in horror from the frightful shape to which his science has at length communicated life" (page 740).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri530\sb257\sa0\sl-262\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 10 November 1832 First publication ofPBS's review of \i Frankenstein \i0 in \i Athenceum \i0 (page 730)\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 see PBS \i Prose, \i0 I, 282-284, 489-492; see also [PFebruary 1818] above.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li5\fi0\ri511\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [?1-10 February 1833] MWS in London wrote to Charles Oilier and asked "if there is another \ul real\ul0  <introd> edition of Frankenstein\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 that is if it goes to the press again\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 will you remember that I have a short passage to add to the Introduction. Do not fail me with regard to this\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 it will only be a few lines\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 & those not disagreable to [the publishers] C. & B.\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 but the contrary\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 " (MWS \i Letters, \i0 II, 129). (In this letter that I have redated from 1831 to 1833,\super 51\nosupersub  MWS was apparently referring to the \i 1831 \i0 "Introduction" to which she wished to add a short passage if a "\ul real\ul0 " edition went "to the press again" [as opposed to the reprint of the stereotyped \i 1831 \i0 edition that came out in 1832, in which only the title page was new]. We can only conjecture what MWS might have added\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 perhaps a quotation from PBS's review of \i Frankenstein \i0 that had recently been published on 10 November 1832?)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri516\sb254\sa0\sl-259\slmult0\tx178 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 5{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }November 1838 MWS in London replied to William Hazlitt, Jr. (who apparently inquired if he might\line republish \i Frankenstein \i0 in his \i Romancist, and Novelist's Library: The Best Works of the Best Authors) \i0 that "Bentley}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li14\fi0\ri523\sb0\sa0\sl-262\slmult0\tx257 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 6{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }Colburn bought the Copy right of Frankenstein when it was printed in the Standard Novels. Frankenstein was\line first published in 181 <9>81 think so perhaps the book is common property\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\f1\cchs0 \'97\hich\af0\dbch\af1\loch\f0\cchs0 but I do not know what the laws are"\line (MWS \i Letters, \i0 II, 299-300).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri518\sb252\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 [PNovember-December 1839] MWS from Putney wrote to Charles Oilier and asked, "Could M\super r\nosupersub  Bentley also let me have a copy of Frankenstein published in the standard Novels?" (MWS \i Letters, \i0 II, 332).}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li17\fi0\ri514\sb252\sa0\sl-266\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 26 December 1849 William and Robert Brough's \i Frankenstein; or, The Model Man \i0 opened at Adelphi Theatre for a run of 54 performances (Forry, page 122; see pages 227-250 for a text of this play).\super 52}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li19\fi0\ri499\sb250\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1 February 1851 MWS died at Chester Square in London at the age of 53. Whatever \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts MWS possessed at that time, if any, would have passed to her only surviving child, Sir Percy Florence Shelley (1819-1899), and thereafter to his widow Jane, Lady Shelley (1820-1899), who kept their collection in their house at Boscombe, near Bournemouth. However, in the absence of any detailed inventory of MWS's 1851 bequest, the entry below for 7 June 1887 suggests an alternative or, at least, a supplementary provenance for the arrival of the \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts at Boscombe.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li24\fi0\ri475\sb252\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx178 \f1\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f1\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 7{\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }June 1887 Richard Garnett mentioned in a letter to Sir Percy Florence Shelley (Bodleian Dep. c. 767/5a, item\line 5) that he had earlier purchased papers for him from Mr. [A. H.] Bradford that included "A portion of the MS. of\line Frankenstein, and the fragment of your father's Chancery paper" and that had come to him "from a picture-cleaner\line named Godwin" (this information is taken from Barker-Benfield, \i Guitar, \i0 page 68). (Nothing else is known about\line either Bradford, Godwin the picture-cleaner, or the size of the \i Frankenstein \i0 "portion," but the fragmentary draft\line in MWS's hand of the Chancery declaration is also now in the Bodleian Library [MS. Shelley adds. c. 5, folios \i 96-\line \i0 97] and derives likewise from the Boscombe collection. But the Garnett evidence must imply that part if not all of}\par }