{\rtf1\ansi \ansicpg1252\stshfloch2{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f4\froman\fcharset204 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset204 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset238 Times New Roman;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset238 Arial;}{\f8\froman\fcharset186 Times New Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset186 Arial;}{\f10\froman\fcharset162 Times New Roman;}{\f11\fswiss\fcharset162 Arial;}{\f12\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f14\froman\fcharset177 Times New Roman;}{\f15\fswiss\fcharset177 Arial;}{\f16\froman\fcharset134 Times New Roman;}{\f17\fswiss\fcharset134 Arial;}{\f18\froman\fcharset136 Times New Roman;}{\f19\fswiss\fcharset136 Arial;}{\f20\froman\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f21\fswiss\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f22\froman\fcharset129 Times New Roman;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset129 Arial;}{\f24\froman\fcharset130 Times New Roman;}{\f25\fswiss\fcharset130 Arial;}{\f26\froman\fcharset161 Times New Roman;}{\f27\fswiss\fcharset161 Arial;}{\f28\froman\fcharset178 Times New Roman;}{\f29\fswiss\fcharset178 Arial;}{\f30\froman\fcharset222 Times New Roman;}{\f31\fswiss\fcharset222 Arial;}{\f32\froman\fcharset163 Times New Roman;}{\f33\fswiss\fcharset163 Arial;}}{\stylesheet {\sbasedon222\f2\fs20 Normal;}}\paperw11909\paperh16834\margl1368\margr456\margt1440\margb360 \sectd \sbknone\pgwsxn11909\pghsxn16834\marglsxn1368\margrsxn456\margtsxn1440\margbsxn360\cols1\colsx60 \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li17\fi0\ri0\sb0\sa0\tx1198 \f2\fs20{\b0\i\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 cvi\loch\f1\cchs0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }\i0\scaps\loch\f0\cchs0 The \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri12\sb631\sa0\sl-259\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 the surviving \i Frankenstein \i0 manuscripts had already left MWS's hands at the time of her death. Although parts of the Fair Copy might have remained behind in the hands of the printer Macdonald or the publisher Lackington, the earlier Draft Notebooks should not have left the author's hands unless discarded, lost, or stolen. It is possible that the Draft Notebooks [probably already disbound] were among the manuscripts the Shelleys left behind at Marlow in 1818 and that the picture-cleaner Godwin came upon them there or through some other association with the GodWin/Shelley families [the picture-cleaner's name may be more than a coincidence].)}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li22\fi0\ri19\sb262\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1899 The remnants of the \i Frankenstein \i0 Notebooks passed through Lady Shelley's bequest to the Scarlett family (the Barons Abinger) and were then deposited in the Bodleian Library by the 8th Lord Abinger in 1974 and 1976.}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li10\fi0\ri0\sb449\sa0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs28 Notes}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\ql\li610\fi0\ri0\sb434\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-9\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 1.\expndtw0 {\charscalex100\expndtw0\tab }This Chronology attempts to record most of the direct references to \i Frankenstein \i0 in the extant writings of}\par \pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li7\fi0\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0 \f2\fs20{\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 MWS, PBS, and her immediate family, but it selectively records other things: e.g., not all but only the most important advertisements (usually, the first ones) for \i Frankenstein; \i0 and only some of her reading of literary works (e.g., \i Paradise Lost) \i0 that influenced the text of her novel. For quotations from other published sources, I have followed the editors' stylistic conventions: (Word or letter omitted\}, <Deletion restored>, and [Word torn from text or otherwise obliterated] in MWS \i Letters; \i0 \{word or letter missing because of hole or tear in manuscript\} in PBS \i Letters; \i0 and <Deletion editorially restored> in \i Clairmont Correspondence.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  2.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The first day of the 1814 meeting and the probability of the earlier meeting in 1812 must be inferred from Godwin's Diary and other evidence. Because PBS and his wife Harriet Westbrook Shelley dined at the Godwins' house on 11 November 1812, the day after MWS returned to London from an extended stay in Scotland, it is likely but not certain that she met PBS at that time. MWS was also away in Scotland during June 1813-March 1814, and the earliest day that she could have met PBS in 1814 was when he dined with her father on 5 May. Although PBS also called on Godwin on 6 May, other evidence may suggest that MWS and PBS considered 5 May as "Our day" or an anniversary of their meeting (see Matthews, page 247).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  3.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri14\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Because Claire Clairmont at this time may have been pregnant with Byron's child (her daughter Allegra) and because she blamed Byron for Allegra's death in 1822, this phrasing about "Creator" and "Creature" has other sad resonances.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  4.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The volumes in question were \i Fantasmagoriana, ou recueil d'bistoires d\super 3\nosupersub apparitions de spectres, revenans, fantomes etc; \i0 Traduit de 1'allemand, par un amateur, 2 vols. (Paris: Lenormant et Schoell, 1812), Jean Baptiste Benoit Eyries' translation into French of two volumes of the five-volume German \i Der Gespensterbucb\i0 . For an English translation of these stories, see \i Tales of the Dead \i0 (London: White, Cochrane, & Co., 1813); for a reprint of this translation, see \i Tales of the Dead: The Ghost Stories of the Villa Diodati, \i0 ed. Terry Hale (Chislehurst: The Gothic Society at The Gargoyle's Head Press, 1992).}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  5.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb2\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-3\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Matthews and Everest (PBS \i Poems, \i0 1,518-519) follow Rogers (PBS \i Works, \i0 II, 357) and conjecture that PBS's poetical fragment, "A shovel of his ashes," "may originate in the ghost-story competition between Byron, S., Mary S. and Polidori at the Villa Diodati proposed on 16 June 1816"; but Erkelenz (pages xxiii-xxiv and 140-141) points to manuscript evidence that dates this fragment in July rather than June 1816.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  6.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri17\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-4\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 The convention of "word/word" in Erkelenz's transcriptions denotes "second word superimposed on . . . the first."}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  7.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri12\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-5\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 Although MWS frequently used and transformed biographical experiences and journal records in her fiction, this particular transformation of PBS and Byron into Victor and Elizabeth is intriguing.}\par {\pntext\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-8\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20  8.\tab}\pard \plain \cbpat8\qj\li0\fi610\ri0\sb0\sa0\sl-257\slmult0\tx1042 \f2\fs20{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pndec\pnstart2\pnindent432\pnf2{\pntxta .}}\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw-8\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 {\b0\i0\cf1\charscalex100\expndtw0\dn0\f2\cchs0\lang1033\langfe1033\fs20 There are many subtle interrelations between these two excursions: e.g., for MWS, "The rain continued in torrents" (MWS \i Journal, \i0 I, 118), prevented her from reaching the summit of Montanvert, and caused her to return to the hotel where that day she wrote her story about the monster; for Victor, "the rain poured down in torrents" (see pages 244-245 in this edition), kept the rest of the Frankenstein party at the inn, and enabled Victor to climb Montanvert, after which he saw the monster on the Mer de Glace.}\par }