# Introduction

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (1797--1851) was born Mary Wollstonecraft
Godwin on 30 August 1797 in London; she was the daughter of two famous
writers, William Godwin (1756--1836) and Mary Wollstonecraft (1759--1797),
who died eleven days after her daughter Mary was born; she eloped with
the married twenty-one-year-old poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792--1822) in
July 1814, when she was sixteen (they were accompanied by Mary Shelley's
slightly younger step-sister Claire Clairmont [1798--1879][^1] on a
six-weeks' tour of France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland); she gave
birth to a premature daughter in February 1815 (who died twelve days
later) and a son in January 1816. Less than four months later, the
unmarried Mary Godwin together with Percy Bysshe Shelley, their
three-months-old son William, and Claire Clairmont (unmarried but
pregnant with the child of Lord Byron [1788--1824], who had recently
separated from his wife) journeyed to Geneva, Switzerland, where they
joined Byron and his doctor John William Polidori (1795--1821) for that
famous summer of 1816, a summer that has since been celebrated by these
writers' own recollections, by biographies, by fiction, and by film.

Among the many works conceived and/or written during that wet and stormy
summer[^2] were Byron's *Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: Canto the Third*,
his drama *Manfred*, and his Vampire "Fragment"; Percy Bysshe Shelley's
poems "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" and "Mont Blanc"; Polidori's tale
*The Vampyre* and his novel *Ernestus Berchtold; or, The Modern Oedipus*
(both published in 1819); and Mary Shelley's *Frankenstein; or, The
Modern Prometheus.* She began that novel as Mary Godwin in June 1816
when she was eighteen years old, she finished it as Mary Shelley in
April/May 1817 when she was nineteen (she had married Percy Bysshe
Shelley on 30 December 1816 after his first wife committed suicide), and
she published it anonymously on 1 January 1818 when she was twenty. Now,
exactly 180 years after she began writing *Frankenstein*, the
publication of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks will provide a unique
opportunity to study the creative process that went into the making of
Mary Shelley's monster.

Many of those who have previously studied *Frankenstein* will know that
there are a number of "texts" of the novel, each with significant
textual flaws: the three-volume *1818* first edition,[^3] with its
printing errors; the "Thomas" copy of *1818*, with Mary Shelley's own
holograph corrections and additions; the two-volume *1823* second
edition (which used *1818* as setting copy), with at least 120 variant
words occasioned by William Godwin, who had arranged publication of this
edition while Mary Shelley (widowed since Percy's death on 8 July 1822)
was still in Italy; and the one-volume *1831* revised edition (which
used *1823* as setting copy), with its many changes that Mary Shelley
herself introduced into the text. I say Mary Shelley herself and will
from this point denominate her as MWS (as she herself did) thereby
providing a shorthand to distinguish MWS from her husband PBS, who also
had a considerable "hand" in the earlier *1818* text.

This edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks will introduce yet more
"texts" of the novel, not all of which are extant: the now lost original
1816 ur-text or "story" that MWS wrote in the summer of 1816; the
two-volume *1816--1*7 "book" or manuscript Draft that MWS wrote for
approximately nine months from *c.* August 1816 through 17 April 1817,
during which time PBS made and suggested alterations to the manuscript;
and the three-volume *1817* manuscript Fair Copy (transcribed directly
from the Draft) that MWS (with some
assistance from PBS) prepared between 18
April and 13 May 1817 for the printers; the now lost proofs for *1818*
that were set from the Fair Copy; and the now lost revises (that is,
corrected proofs) for*1818.* The extant texts reproduced here in The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks are the surviving manuscripts of the *1816--17*
Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy, manuscripts owned by Lord Abinger and
now on deposit at the Bodleian Library, Oxford University.

The Draft was originally written in two large (hard-cover) notebooks,
here denominated Notebooks A and B, now disbound and consisting of a
total of 152 leaves (with text on 301 pages) that, together with three
insert leaves and two insert slips (with text on a total of 8 pages),
account for approximately 87% of the *1818* text (missing are the leaves
for Walton's four introductory Letters; for the beginning of Draft: Vol.
I, Ch. [1]; for the end of Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3; and for all of Draft:
Vol. II, Ch. [4]). The Fair Copy was originally written in [?eleven]
smaller (soft-cover) notebooks, the only surviving ones here denominated
Notebooks C1 and C2. These two notebooks are now disbound: 19 leaves are
missing; the 29 surviving leaves (with text on 58 pages), together with
1 insert leaf (with text on 1 page) as well as 1 substitute leaf (with
repeated text on 2 pages), contain approximately 12% of the received
*1818* text.

In an attempt to simplify the complicated sequence of these texts, I
offer the following outline.

<section class="aside">

## The Texts of *Frankenstein*

(For more information on each of these texts [including the dating
thereof], consult the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below. See also
"Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text" and "Hypothetically
Reconstructing the Fair Copy" below. The texts identified by bold
typeface below are printed in full in this edition, and quotations from
other texts [*1818 Thomas*, *1823*, and *1831*] are to be found in the
footnotes.)

| Ur-text: Draft(s) of a "story" ([?17] June--[August or September]
  1816)---not extant[^4]
| ↓
| ***1816--17 Draft***: 2-volume novel in two hard-cover notebooks
  ([August or September] 1816--17 April
  1817)---most of **Notebooks A and B** survive
| ↓
| ***1817* Fair Copy**: 3-volume novel in [?eleven] soft-cover
  notebooks (18 April--13 May 1817)---parts of
  **Notebooks C1 and C2** survive 
| ↓
| Proofs ([?23] September--[?3] November 1817)---not extant
| ↓
| Revises ([?23] September--[?20] November 1817)---not extant
| ↓
| ***1818***: 1st Edition in 3 vols. (1 January 1818)---published by
  Lackington et al. in 500 copies
| ↓
| ↓ *1818 Thomas:* "Thomas" copy of 1st Edition (corrected by MWS
| ↓ before July 1823)---survives at Pierpont Morgan Library
| ↓
| *1823*: 2d Edition in 2 vols. (11 August 1823)---published by G. and W. B.
  Whittaker (but not set from
  *1818 Thomas*) 
| ↓
| ↓ [*1826*]: [?Re-issued 2d Edition] (4 April 1826)---apparently issued by Henry Colburn
| ↓
| *1831*: Revised Edition in 1 vol. (31 October 1831)---published by Henry
  Colburn and Richard Bentley
  in 4020 copies

</section>

A listing of all the variants (both accidental and substantive) that
exist among these extant texts is beyond the scope of this (and,
possibly, any) codex edition, and no editor has ever collated all the
accidental variants of punctuation, capitalization, and spelling between
any two editions. However, nearly complete collations of the substantive
or word variants between*1818* and *1831* have been published: see the
collations in *1818 Rieger* (pages 230--259 [and page 288]) and in *1818*
Macdonald (pages 317--359)---Rieger but not Macdonald
incorporated the readings from *1818 Thomas* in his text; for a shorter
collation that is prefaced by a useful summary of the type of changes
involved, see *1818 Butler* (pages 199--228); and, for the most
comprehensive collation, one that incorporates the autograph corrections
in *1818 Thomas* and that also includes substantive variants in *1823*
as well as *1831*, see *1818 Crook* (pages 182--227).[^5] In this edition,
I offer for the first time the parallel texts by which the extant parts
of both the *1816--17* Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy can be collated
with the *1818* text, and Appendices A and B provide a means for other
collations (Draft with extant Fair Copy; and PBS Fair Copy with MWS
re-transcription of the Fair Copy).

It should be stressed that these collations and parallel texts are
valuable tools by which a reader can and should learn that a text or
literary "product" involves a literary "process" that must be understood
before any attempt is made to "fix" a text, whether "fix" is understood
to mean "establish" or "make firm and unchanging" or "emend and
therefore change." In the case of *Frankenstein*, the substantive
changes that MWS made in her revised edition are so extensive that many
teachers and students of *Frankenstein* consider *1818* and *1831* as
two different novels. Among the significant "alterations" made in *1831*
are the following: a transformation of Elizabeth from a cousin to a
foundling having no blood relation to Victor; a new chapter to
accommodate a much longer exposition about Victor's childhood; and a
more explicit and earlier introduction of the doppelgänger theme when
Victor alludes to Aristophanes' myth of the circular and then divided
primal human beings in Plato's *Symposium*.[^6] The already published
collations between *1818* and *1831* provide an opportunity for any
reader of *Frankenstein* to experience the creative process by which MWS
transformed an already published edition into another text, and this
edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks extends that opportunity
backwards: it publishes for the first time the extant portions of the
*1816--17* Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy (both printed parallel to
*1818*) so that the reader can "see" the transformations of one text
into another and, at the same time, "see" the degree of PBS's
involvement in these transformations.

In addition to collations and parallel texts, there have been other
studies that have addressed the texts of *Frankenstein* by way of the
manuscripts, but each of these has been flawed, in one way or another,
because the full texts of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks, here published
for the first time, were not available to benefit the earlier studies.
As this edition will make evident, much of the criticism to date on
*Frankenstein* will have to be re-evaluated in light of the
collaboration between MWS and PBS, a collaboration that can now be
"seen" in this edition by way of the different fonts used to distinguish
the Shelleys' often similar manuscript hands. Those who have previously
attempted to make those distinctions include James Rieger, E. B. Murray,
Ann Mellor, Marie Hélène Huet, and David Ketterer, each of whose
contributions will be briefly addressed below in "MWS and PBS's
Collaboration in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks." Because so many critics
of the novel have made factual errors (repeating, e.g., that
*Frankenstein* was published in March 1818 rather than its actual
publication date of 1 January 1818), I also refer the reader to the
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for a record of the facts about the
novel as they can best be determined. Some readers may prefer to go
immediately to that Chronology in preparation for reading The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks.

## Using This Edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

This edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks partakes of the
characteristics of a diplomatic edition, that is, one that "doubles" or
reproduces another text (whether printed or manuscript) with a fidelity
that respects the original's spelling, punctuation, lineation, and other
particulars so that the reader can re-experience, albeit in a different
representational form, the original text. More precisely stated,
however, this edition is made up of three separate editions: (1) a
*photofacsimile* of the manuscript; (2) a *type facsimile* that
replicates the manuscript (page by page, line by line, word by word);
and (3) a "*diplomatic*"*or literal transcript* of the *1818* first
edition that is printed in tandem with the type facsimile of the
manuscript, providing the reader parallel texts by which the creative
process may be studied. This combination of three editions[^7] was made
possible by three fortuitous circumstances: a Garland policy (worked out
in collaboration with Donald H. Reiman and the Bodleian Library) to
reproduce in photofacsimile all extant manuscript pages, each of which
would be faced by a type facsimile; a set of *Frankenstein* manuscripts
in which MWS managed to write fewer than ten words in each line; and a
pre-determined Garland 9x12 inch format that could accommodate the
manuscript
text together with the *1818* text and extensive notes on each
transcription page. Consequently, facing pages in this edition will
allow the reader to see the manuscript photofacsimile on a verso that is
faced by a recto containing not only the type facsimile of the
manuscript but also a literal transcript *of 1818 as* well as a textual
apparatus in the form of footnotes, all of which discrete yet
interrelated parts are described in greater detail below.

### Manuscript Photofacsimile Pages (versos)

The verso pages are used to reproduce in photofacsimile the 369
*Frankenstein* manuscript pages (some of them more than once) that were
photographed by the Photographic Department of the Bodleian Library,
Oxford University, in 1993 and then printed by Garland in 1994 and again
in 1995 (the reprocessed 1995 prints, which provided much greater
resolution, were used for the photofacsimiles in this edition). These
manuscript pages originated in the following notebooks: the *1816--17*
Draft in hard-cover Notebooks A (in Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep. c. 534/1) and
B (in Dep. c. 534/1); the *1817* Fair Copy in soft-cover Notebooks C1
and C2 (both in Dep. c. 534/2). All of the covers have long been
discarded: those on the Draft Notebooks possibly in April/May 1817 when
the Draft was transcribed into the Fair Copy; and those on the Fair-Copy
Notebooks most likely in September--November 1817 when the Fair Copy was
used as printer's copy. (In those places where individual manuscript
pages are also missing, the size of each missing section is represented
by the *1818* text occupying the full width of a verso and/or recto in
this edition, in effect substituting for the more typical
photofacsimile/ transcription opening.)

Headers
:   The headers at the top of each manuscript photofacsimile
    page identify the manuscript of *Frankenstein* by reference to the
    Bodleian shelfmark (Deposit number) and the folio number (whether verso
    or recto), and this physical place in the manuscript is then equaled to
    the conceptual place in the novel (whether Draft or Fair Copy; whether
    Notebook A or B or C1 or C2): for example, **Dep. c. 534/1, folio 37
    verso=Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, page 98 [Notebook B]** means that this
    manuscript page may be found in the Bodleian Library, in Dep. c. 534/1,
    on folio 37 verso, a point in the *1816--17* Draft of a two-volume novel
    that MWS had designated Volume II, Chapter 10, page 98. (It should be
    remarked here that Notebooks A and B do not correspond exactly to
    Volumes I and II of the Draft and that neither of these divisions
    corresponds exactly with Dep. c. 477/1 and 534/1.)

    All readers are encouraged to use the header at the top of each
    photofacsimile page together with the header at the top of each
    transcription page (for which, see below) as a guide to just where they
    are in no less than five "places," the most important of which is the
    novel MWS conceived and drafted in 1816--17. The diagram below may
    simplify what is a set of very complicated relationships, but I ask the
    reader's patience to consider first that the two physical Notebooks A
    and B are paginated not as notebooks but as a two-volume novel.
    Consider, for example, that the draft of Volume I of the novel concludes
    not at the end but rather in the midst of Notebook A, at a point (MWS's
    page 160, a verso) where MWS would soon turn another page: she left
    blank her next page 161, a recto; then she immediately began the draft
    of Volume II on the next page (a verso), which she paginated with the
    number "1" although the preceding page in the same notebook was "161."
    (A verso is an unusual place both for a page 1 and for the beginning of
    a new Volume, either of which would ordinarily be graced by a recto or a
    right-hand page.) Complicating this matter further is that the division
    between the two Bodleian deposits of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks in
    1974 and 1976 comes close to but does not quite equal the division
    between Volumes I and II of the Draft novel: the reader will encounter
    one photofacsimile with the header "*266* **Dep. c. 477/1, folio 62
    verso=Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 160 [Notebook A]**" that is followed
    by the next photofacsimile with the header "*268* **Dep. c. 534/1, folio
    1 recto=Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 161 [Notebook A]**," thereby showing
    that Lord Abinger's two Bodleian deposits not only divide parts of one
    notebook but also divide parts of one volume of a novel that MWS had
    paginated successively. Put simply, the Abinger and Bodleian division of
    Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep. c. 534/1 does not equal the physical division of
    Notebooks A and B, nor does either of these divisions quite equal MWS's
    conceptual division of Draft Volumes I and II. These divisions, yet
    again complicated by the three-volume division of the
    *1818* first edition (Volume and Chapter numbers may be found at the top
    of each transcription page) as well as by the two-part division of this
    edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks (revealed in part by the
    italicized pages *266* and *268* in the above illustration), demand the
    following diagram, arranged in chronological order:

    ----------------  -------------------------------------------------------
    Notebooks         A------------------  B--------------- C1------ C2------

    MWS Draft         I------------ II---------------------

    *1818*            I------ II--------------- III---------

    Bod. Dep.         c. 477/1 ------ c. 534/1 --------- c. 534/2-------------

    *1816--17 Rob.*   Part One --------- Part Two------------------------------

    ----------------  -------------------------------------------------------

Bodleian Foliation
:   Although all leaves of The *Frankenstein*
    Notebooks are now foliated in pencil at the top right of each recto (and
    are cited as reference points in the headers, textual commentary, and
    Quiring Charts), the photofacsimiles of the manuscript leaves
    (photographed in 1993) reproduce the Bodleian folio numbers only in Dep.
    c. 477/1 (deposited in 1974 and then foliated by Margaret Crum); Dep. c.
    534/1--2, although deposited in 1976, was not foliated until 31 January
    1995, when, after a discussion about a suitable ordering of the leaves,
    Bruce Barker-Benfield penciled the folio numbers onto each recto. The
    Library's purpose in adding such foliation was not to dictate an order
    of leaves (the presence of insertions allows for several alternatives)
    but to enable a neutral mode of citation for each surviving piece of
    paper.

Notes
:   Notes that address the physical conditions of a manuscript
    page are positioned with all other textual notes at the bottom of each
    transcription page.

### Transcription Pages (rectos)

The recto pages contain not only the type facsimile of the manuscript
text but also (line by line) a literal transcript of the *1818* text as
well as a textual apparatus in the form of footnotes.

Type Facsimile of the Manuscript
:   This type facsimile of the
    manuscript text was initially prepared from the high-resolution
    black-and-white photographs, then checked twice (for a period of 4 weeks
    in January/February 1995 and then for another week in September 1995)
    against the original manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, and then read
    aloud against the photographs in an attempt to represent accurately the
    text of the original. The text of the type facsimile was formatted by
    WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS, using "Tables" to create 2 or 3 columns and
    using "Styles" to create different fonts by which to distinguish MWS's
    hand from that of PBS and to represent other peculiarities of the
    manuscript (for example, smear deletions and Bodleian foliation). At a
    glance, the reader should be able to determine just what words and
    suggestions PBS introduced into MWS's novel. These different fonts and
    other conventions used in the type facsimile are as follows:

    Cancel Lines
    :   There are three means by which cancelations are
        represented. Individual letters or words or phrases that then MWS and/or
        PBS canceled by horizontal lines are represented by the strikeover
        feature: e.g., word or word (in the latter case, the manuscript cancel
        line did not pass through all of the letters of the word).[^8] Although I
        did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS from PBS horizontal
        cancel lines, the surrounding words in most instances should make
        possible the identification of who canceled what words: e.g., PBS
        replacement words would indicate that he had just canceled the words to
        be replaced. Footnotes are occasionally used to identify whether a
        letter or word or phrase was canceled by either MWS or PBS.

        Longer cancelations are much easier to distinguish. Ink and other
        evidence prove that MWS always canceled with long vertical straight
        lines (represented by a graphics line feature in WordPerfect), whereas
        PBS always canceled longer sections of the manuscript with wavy lines
        (represented by wavy ink lines that have been drawn on the transcript
        page in an attempt to replicate the original manuscript.)[^9]

    Carets
    :   Although I did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS
        from PBS carets, the hand used for the
        marginal or interlinear insertion in all (or most) instances would be
        the hand that entered the caret. MWS used the caret more often than PBS
        to signal an insertion: PBS would frequently write above a canceled word
        without employing a caret, but in some of these cases MWS may have later
        supplied a caret. For purposes of lineation in the type facsimile, the
        caret (positioned in order to replicate the manuscript) is considered a
        part of the line below which it appears.

    Conjectural Readings
    :   Curly brackets enclose words or letters in the
        manuscript that are conjectural or indecipherable: e.g., {?word} or {?}.
        Angle brackets enclose words or letters that have been cut or torn from
        the manuscript but may be conjectured or otherwise deduced: e.g.,
        \<?word\> or \<word\>.

    Fonts
    :   I have employed the following fonts in this type facsimile of
        the manuscript:

        <div class="unstyled-list">

        + 10-point CG Times for MWS text (8.5-point CG Times for MWS interlinear
          text)
        + *10-point Garamond Halbfett Kursiv for PBS text (8.5-point Garamond
          Halbfett Kursiv for interlinear PBS text)*[^10] 
        + <span class="outline">outline</span> for smear deletions in either <span class="outline">MWS text</span> or <span class="outline">*PBS text*</span> (see, e.g.,
          transcription pages 233 and 455) 
        + `Courier-WP (Type 1) for all other hands
          (e.g., compositors or Bodleian staff)`

        </div>

        Although there are many similarities between MWS's and PBS's hands,
        there are enough differences (especially in their formation of the
        letters "d," "f," "r," "w,"[^11] and "x") to make me confident that in
        almost all cases I have properly distinguished their hands. Usually, the
        very slant of an extended marginal passage or of an interlinear
        correction made it fairly easy to identify the two hands. But in those
        cases where I had to conjecture about a letter or a word or two that did
        not have very distinguishing letters, I would consult with Bruce
        Barker-Benfield in order to determine which hand was the more likely,
        represent the word in the transcription by means of that font, and then
        footnote the conjecture: e.g., a 60/40% likelihood that the "she" on
        pages 182--183 (line 12) in this edition was MWS's meant that I employed
        the MWS interlinear font and that the footnote for line 12 read "*?MWS*
        she." In those cases where neither ink nor other evidence would make one
        hand more likely than the other, the default was always to print the
        word as MWS's and to footnote the representation as conjectural.

    Incompletely Formed Terminal Letters
    :   In cases where MWS (or PBS)
        trailed off and did not quite finish the last letter of a word that was
        purposely left incomplete or canceled, I have taken the liberty to
        conjecture and print that letter as if it were completely formed in the
        manuscript (see, e.g., pages 72--73 in this edition, line 31, where there
        is enough of an incomplete "u" in the canceled word in manuscript to
        warrant my transcription of "~~recou~~ recourse"---in this case, MWS
        apparently trailed off because she was unsatisfied by the slightly
        misformed "re" in her first attempt).

    Ink/Pencil
    :   All of the manuscript pages were written in ink, and
        each of the few places where MWS, PBS, or an unidentified hand used
        pencil is indicated in the footnotes. Sometimes MWS would trace over in
        pen PBS's penciled words (see, e.g., pages 62--65, 292--293 in this
        edition). It was probably MWS who penciled the ruled margin in Notebook
        A (see "Rules," below), and the Bodleian foliation was done in pencil.

    Line Numbers
    :   Bracketed line numbers [set in 8-point CG Times]
        respect all lines and interlineations except for below-the-line carets.

    Other Conventions
    :   I have attempted to reproduce the peculiarities
        of the manuscript as far as WordPerfect would allow---see, e.g., page 335
        for writing up a slope (using the "Advance" command) and page 601 for
        writing vertically down a page (using Graphic Boxes).

    Overlaying Letters and Words
    :   In an attempt to make this type
        facsimile an easily read text, I have not employed the convention of
        arrows or carets in the transcription to indicate that one letter or
        word overlays another. Rather, I have printed the overlaying letters or
        words in the facsimile and relegated to the footnotes the letters and
        words underneath that were replaced. (The presence of the manuscript
        photofacsimile as a gloss and a check makes such a convention possible.)
        Thus the reader will frequently
        encounter in the footnotes entries like "18]*PBS* ing *overlays MWS* ed
        *in* entreating" meaning that "entreating" is the word printed on line
        18 in the type facsimile and that the manuscript photofacsimile should
        reveal that MWS had first written "entreated" and that PBS later wrote
        "*ing*" over MWS's "ed" (see transcription page 111, line 18, in this
        edition for this example).

    Rules
    :   There are up to three rules on a transcription page. The
        *single horizontal rule* is used to separate the footnotes from the type
        facsimile and the literal transcript above. The *double vertical rule*
        is used to separate the type facsimile from the literal transcript of
        *1818.* The *single vertical rule* represents the penciled rule that MWS
        made in Notebook A to create a left margin in which she and PBS could
        emend the text. I have attempted to represent the position of the words
        next to this rule as accurately as possible: I have right justified all
        of the words to the left of that rule (except for the last line of a
        passage if it is some distance from the rule [see, e.g., transcription
        page 11, lines 19--41 in the margin, the "her own." in line 41 not right
        justified]); and, where warranted and possible, I have represented words
        that cross the marginal rule (see, e.g., transcription page 97, line 30
        in the margin).

    Shadowing of Page
    :   Any partially shadowed transcription page
        indicates that the page is repeated elsewhere (with different shadowing)
        to accommodate and explain an insertion in the manuscript notebook: the
        reader is advised to follow the narrative through the unshadowed
        sections of these pages and to read about the circumstances of the
        insertion in the shadowed sections (the first instances of this
        repetition on pages 14--37 in this edition are somewhat complicated,
        involving more than one insertion at a time; the reader is therefore
        advised initially to consult simpler forms of this repetition, e.g., on
        pages 416--421 in this edition).

Literal Transcript of *1818*
:   The text of *1818 is* based on (and
    was read aloud against) the copy in the University of Delaware Library,
    and where there were printing errors it was checked against other
    copies; in one place, the word "Then" and an adjacent comma, both of
    which had dropped from the Delaware and some other copies of *1818*,
    were restored to the text (see transcription page 283 in this edition).
    In all, I have consulted fourteen additional copies of the *1818* first
    edition: four copies at the Pierpont Morgan Library (one of which is
    *1818 Thomas*), three copies at The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of
    Shelley and His Circle at The New York Public Library, and one copy each
    at the Bodleian Library (Oxford University), All Souls College (Oxford
    University), Cambridge University Library, the Library of Congress, the
    Newberry Library, the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale
    University, and the library of one private collector.[^12] A selective
    comparison of printing errors in all fifteen copies suggests that there
    was only one stop-press correction in the 500 printed copies of the
    first edition (affecting only a page number), and that may have occurred
    very early in the pulling of revises (see line 21 and note on
    transcription page 257 in this edition). There are, however, some
    differences among the copies of *1818* as a result of the formes having
    loosened or type having been broken during the printing process (see
    "Emendations to and Anomalies in the *1818* Text" below). All such
    variations as well as all printing errors and misspellings (but not
    variant spellings) are pointed out in the textual notes, thereby
    enabling me to produce an unemended literal transcript of *1818*, one
    that duplicates the first edition (in its hypothetically reconstructed
    complete state) as much as possible, although filtered through the
    following conventions:

    8.5-point CG Times
    :   The base font of 8.5-point CG Times is used to
        represent the text, but I also attempt to image print variations in
        *1818* by using such things as initial display type (e.g., Word) for the
        first word in each Chapter---as well as large and small Caps and even an
        8-point font for portions of the letters Walton and others exchanged in
        the narrative.

    Lineation
    :   The *1818* text parallels the manuscript text, line by
        line, as much as space allows. When a manuscript word occupies the end
        of one line and the beginning of another, the *1818* word is represented
        on the first of these lines; when there are extensive revisions between
        *1816--17* Draft and *1818* (whether evident in extant *1817* Fair Copy
        or deducible as having taken place in now missing fair copy, proofs,
        and/or revises), the *1818* text will have fewer or more words occupying
        the available lines than is the case for
        the *1816--17* Draft text. A quick visual comparison of these parallel
        texts will show the places of major alteration between the Draft and
        *1818*: see especially pages 449 and 459 in this edition for places
        where MWS and/or PBS made extensive changes late in the proof stage; see
        also the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 20 October, for [22] October,
        and for 28 October 1817.

        Where no manuscript is extant, the *1818* text is still reproduced
        diplomatically but without reference to any manuscript. By including
        these portions of *1818*, the reader can both "see" the proportion of
        text missing from manuscript and have at hand a complete *1818* text to
        compare with other texts.

    Page Numbers
    :   The page numbers in *1818* are in bold, bracketed and
        placed in the literal transcript to show the **[number:]**beginning of a
        page, even if the page breaks over a hyphenated word (see, e.g.,
        transcription page 17 in this edition).

    Dagger
    :   A † follows any word, number, or punctuation mark in the
        literal transcript of *1818* that is glossed in the footnotes, the note
        being preceded by "**<span class="underline">1818</span> text:line number**]".

    Paragraph Symbol
    :   A *¶* is added in the transcript of *1818* to make
        more evident the beginning of each paragraph (excepting the first
        paragraph in each chapter that is signaled by a display word).

    Double Quotation Marks
    :   The ordinary double quotation marks in CG
        Times (" ") are altered in the literal transcript to curved quotation
        marks (“ ”) in an attempt to replicate those in *1818.*

Headers
:   The headers for each page locate the reader in the
    manuscript text (whether *1816--17* Draft or *1817* Fair Copy) and in the
    *1818* text. More important, the headers enable the reader to witness
    the restructuring of a two-volume novel in Draft (through a three-volume
    novel in Fair Copy, most of which has to be extrapolated from the other
    evidence) into a three-volume first edition in *1818.* In the act of
    fair copying her text, MWS actually changed the beginning and endings of
    many chapters as she restructured her novel. That restructuring is made
    evident in the headers for each transcription page: see, for example,
    transcription page 69 where the beginning of **Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 5,
    page 61** has become the beginning of **1818: Vol. I, Ch. III, pages
    78--79**; or transcription page 473 where **Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 12, page
    118** has been divided into **1818: Volume III, Chs. II-III, pages
    38--40**. In this latter example, MWS's manuscript note to herself to
    "Finish Chap. 2 here" directly shows how she restructured the two-volume
    Draft into the three-volume Fair Copy. The reader should also note how
    nearly identical the pagination is between the three-volume Fair Copy
    and the three-volume *1818:* see, e.g., the header on transcription page
    749 in this edition: **Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. VII, page 175 [=] 1818:
    Vol. III, Ch. VII, pages 176--178**.

Notes
:   The format and the extent of the notes are in part determined
    by the limitation of space, but footnotes rather than endnotes are used
    in order to make all relevant information available on facing pages of
    this edition. I have attempted to serve simultaneously, as much as
    possible, the principles of clarity, economy, and consistency. The
    different fonts used for MWS and PBS in the type facsimile of the
    manuscript mean that I did not have to footnote each place PBS wrote in
    the manuscript, but I do identify as PBS's any of his words or passages
    that are discussed in the notes (e.g., "*PBS* ing *overlays MWS* ed *in*
    examining").

    MWS and PBS in Notes
    :   Unless identified as PBS's (or someone
        else's), all words or marks discussed in the footnotes are MWS's. Words
        conjecturally printed as MWS's in the type facsimile are footnoted with
        "?MWS"; those conjecturally printed as PBS's are footnoted with "?PBS."

    Order of Notes
    :   Each note, preceded by location (whether page
        position or line number) and a closing bracket (both set in bold) is
        arranged in the following order: **preceding page(s)]; entire page];
        left edge]; top of page]; right edge]; bottom of page];
        margin:sequential line number(s) from type facsimile]; sequential line
        number(s) from type facsimile]; <span class="underline">1818</span> text: sequential line number(s)
        from type facsimile]; following page(s)]**.

    Phrasing and Types of Notes
    :   Space dictated that notes be written in
        the most economical form, where possible in a phrase rather than a
        clause or a sentence. Distinctions are made between *top* and *upper*
        (the former higher on the page), between *bottom* and *lower* (the
        former lower on the page), between *above* and *below* (referring to
        vertical positions on the page) and *over* and *under* (referring to
        words, letters, or marks that overlay or underlay others), between
        *miswritten* and *misformed* (the former usually referring to a
        misspelled word; the latter, to a misshaped letter), between
        *bleed-through* and *show-through* ink marks (both visible in the
        photofacsimiles, but the latter visible without the ink having bled
        through to the other side of the paper), and between *wet-offset* and
        *dry-offset* ink marks (the former evidencing an ink mark resulting from
        the closing of a still-wet inked page against another page; the latter,
        from a chemical process that sometimes causes dry ink from one leaf to
        "yellow" a facing leaf in a closed notebook). Economy has dictated such
        non-parallel phrasings as "*misspelled* word" and "*variant spelling*
        word" (in both cases "word" is the word as it appears in the manuscript,
        and "variant spelling" covers a multitude of spellings that are
        sanctioned in one form or another by the *OED*); the combined short and
        long "s" has been termed the "*ligatured* ss". Among the other types of
        notes are those addressing the condition of the paper (including such
        matters as soiling, discoloration, torn edges, holes, glue residue), the
        appearance of various marks (e.g., insert marks, carets, cancel lines),
        and the formation of certain letters or words (e.g., uncrossed t's,
        crossed l's, one letter or word overlaying another, and some initial
        letters like "o" that could be either capital or lower case). For the
        kinds of notes on the *1818* text, see "Emendations to and Anomalies in
        the *1818* Text" below.

    Typeface of Notes
    :   *Location and bracket are in bold*; MWS as well
        as PBS manuscript words are printed in roman; *and textual commentary is
        in italic.* These conventions mean that the notes do not employ the font
        distinctions between a PBS word and an MWS word that were used in the
        type facsimile of the manuscript. Thus a word represented in the type
        facsimile as "allow*ed*" (indicating that PBS had added "ed" to MWS's
        "allow") would be described in the notes as "*PBS* ed *added**in*
        allowed" (see also "MWS and PBS in Notes" above). The notes are in
        8-point CG Times, and small caps are used for "mws" and "pbs."

  Garland Page Numbers
  :   Garland page numbers in this edition are in
      italics, are positioned at the top left of a verso and the top right of
      a recto, and are used as a means of reference (e.g., "see transcription
      page 000 in this edition" or "see pages 000--000 in this edition").

### Appendix A

Appendix A prints in parallel form the texts of the *1816--17* Draft and
of the extant *1817* Fair Copy, thereby showing how MWS refined her text
in April/May 1817 as she prepared it for the publisher and the press.
Because PBS undertook part of the fair copying (see pages 748--773 in
this edition), these parallel texts in Appendix A provide the reader an
opportunity to contrast the ways that MWS (see pages 780--810) and PBS
(see pages 810--817) altered the Draft while transcribing the Fair Copy.

### Appendix B

Appendix B prints in parallel form the texts of a portion of the PBS
Fair Copy and the extant MWS re-transcription of that portion, a
re-transcription occasioned by one or both of two factors: a discovery
that some of the PBS Fair-Copy text had been damaged when the pages were
cut from the notebook; and/or a possible reluctance to submit to any
publisher (but especially to PBS's publisher Charles Ollier) the Fair
Copy with parts[^13] in PBS's distinctive hand, potentially revealing the
identity of the anonymous author and "friend" whom PBS represented to
the publishers.

### Appendix C

Appendix C reproduces the four photofacsimiles of MWS's Cyrus Fragment
that accompanied the *Frankenstein* manuscripts when they were deposited
in the Bodleian Library in 1974 and in 1976. These two leaves, which are
foliated in Dep. c. 477/1 (folio 63) and 534/1 (folio 95), may have been
linked to the *Frankenstein* manuscripts long before they came to the
Bodleian.

## Emendations to and Anomalies in the *1818* Text

Incorporating the literal transcript *of 1818* into this edition has
raised new questions about The *Frankenstein* Notebooks and their
relations to the first edition. In answering some of these questions, I
decided not to emend *1818* and instead to print a hypothetically
reconstructed and uncorrected *1818* that would serve and be served by
the Draft and Fair Copy. Seeing these texts in parallel columns enables
the reader to understand part of the process by which the manuscript was
transformed into a book and to discover possible printing errors, even
though most of the Fair Copy that was used as printer's copy is now
missing. For example, seeing the word "lurid" in the Draft
photofacsimile and type facsimile and the word "livid" in *1818* (see
pages 98--99 in this edition) leads to a strong suspicion that either MWS
in the now missing Fair Copy or the compositor in the now missing proof
mistakenly transformed the Draft "lurid" into the printed "livid." Of
course, I have the luxury in this edition of merely suggesting rather
than the more difficult task of making such emendations, but the reader
should be able to determine most of those that I am making in a new
edition of *Frankenstein.* In all, there are nearly 100 places (each
signaled by a dagger in the *1818* column of this edition) where the
text needs emending because of misprintings (e.g., "Willia mhad"),
misspellings (e.g., "guished"), mispunctuations (e.g., missing quotation
marks or periods that should be question marks), broken or missing type
(e.g., the "Then" and comma that are missing from many copies of
*1818*), or MWS errors in her Draft and Fair Copy (e.g., the name
"Gower" rather than "Goring"). (For these particular printing and/or
textual errors, see pages 49, 107, 157, 203, 283, and 459 in this
edition.)

The dagger is also used in a number of other places in the *1818* text
in order to signal and address (1) each of the emendations (six of which
I dispute) that Ketterer has suggested in his article "Readings" and (2)
the fourteen places where *1818 Wolf-1* misrepresents the *1818* text
and/or introduces new errors into the text. For the relevant pages in
this edition, see the entries in my list of "Short Titles" for *1818
Wolf-1* and for Ketterer "Readings." I supply these specifics about
*1818 Wolf-1* in order to prevent that not-so-faithful photofacsimile
from being the source of future errors.[^14]

## The Makeup of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

<div class="centered smaller">

| *(Quiring Charts and technical descriptions below are based on*
| *a text originally prepared by Dr. B. C. Barker-Benfield.)*

</div>

The remnants of the original *Frankenstein* Notebooks tell a fascinating
tale about the way that MWS created her novel. Part of this tale is
evident in the preceding advice on how to use this edition, and the
fullest expression of the narrative about these notebooks is to be found
in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" that concludes this Introduction.
Here, however, the technical details about the number and makeup of
these notebooks at least provide an outline to the creative process
involved in the making of *Frankenstein.* The technical details
concerning each of the four extant notebooks are presented separately
below, but it is worth mentioning here that all four of these notebooks
in which MWS drafted and then fair copied her novel in 1816--17 were
originally bound; that the bindings and the covers of all four notebooks
have long since disappeared; that the surviving manuscripts in the
Abinger papers are all loose leaves, all of which are "singletons"
(i.e., single leaves), with the exception of two bifolia that are still
joined; and that watermarks, torn edges, glue residue along some edges,
sewing holes, and wet offset ink blots provide sufficient evidence by
which to reconstruct the original makeup of the quires in each of these
notebooks. Moreover, the very nature of the
writing in these notebooks proves that MWS drafted and fair copied her
novel (and that PBS made his changes and suggested his alterations)
while the notebooks were still intact: each main group of now detached
leaves includes at least one reconstructed bifolium where the writing
overlaps across the two halves; the writing at what would have been the
inside edges of some versos displays a wavering and a trailing off,
indicating that the writer's hand was impeded by the gutter of the still
bound notebook; the writing at the outside edges of the rectos
frequently carries over to the outside edge(s) of what would have been
the notebook's next leaf (or leaves), a very natural effect when a large
volume is splayed open during the process of writing; now missing leaves
that were apparently discarded during the composition process have
sometimes left wet offset ink blots, suggesting that the leaves were
torn from a bound notebook; and different leaves from later quires or
from other sources were sometimes inserted into the main sequence of
pages in such a way (leaving the evidence of wet offset ink blots or pin
holes) to indicate that the main sequence of pages was bound in a
notebook. All of this evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion that
*Frankenstein* was drafted and fair copied in notebooks that were
purchased as ready-made, bound blankbooks from commercial stationers in
England or abroad. Further details about the size and source of the
notebooks, the type of covers, the number of pages in each quire, the
watermarks, and other particulars are provided separately for each
notebook below.

### Draft Notebook A

<div class="centered smaller">

| (Dep. c. 477/1, folios 4--28a, 28b--62; Dep. c. 534/1, folios 1--17=Pages
   10--15, 26--31, 36--339 in this edition)
| (With Dep. c. 477/1 insert folios
  1--3 and Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 18=Pages 16--25, 32--35, 340--341 in
  this edition)

</div>

Paper, Watermarks, and Covers
:   Notebook A survives as 77 leaves of
    continental laid paper with a light-blue tint, with edges that were
    commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 270--271 x 186--187 mm.,
    yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 270--271 x 372--374 mm., and
    a minimum whole-sheet size of 372--374 x 540--542 mm. The leaves were made
    up into a quarto notebook, with each of the two watermarks split across
    the reconstructed folds: from the "mould" side, the watermarks read D |
    ADIVONNE; the countermark is a bell (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 1--2;
    3--4). There are five sewing holes visible, with three main stations (for
    cords?) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at the top and bottom. Glue
    residue at the gutters on outside leaves of quires not only confirm the
    quiring-structure of the notebook, but also indicate a substantial
    professional binding with hard covers. The continental paper of the
    notebook suggests that it was purchased abroad, probably in Geneva or
    its environs. There are no other examples of this paper in the Bodleian
    Shelley collections.

Date of Notebook A
:   ([August or September]--[?December] 1816): If MWS
    purchased this notebook in Geneva, she possibly began drafting Walton's
    introductory Letters into this notebook as early as August 1816; she
    made her first insertion on or around 28 October 1816; she appears to
    have finished drafting the part of her novel in Notebook A on or around
    5 December 1816, after or while finishing a "very long" chapter on
    Safie's arrival and her language instruction; and she may have revised
    and drastically shortened this "very long" Ch. [4] as late as 10--17 or
    even 29 April 1817 (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for all of these
    dates), days when she (and probably PBS) made final corrections to the
    Draft in Notebook A.

Foliation and Pagination in Notebook A
:   The Quiring Charts below
    (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
    Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in this notebook. MWS would
    paginate her notebook as she went along,[^15] ordinarily at the top
    outside corner of the page (top left on the verso; top right on the
    recto). Errors that she corrected at once are not of any great
    significance, but there are some significant alterations in pagination
    that help us understand her process of composition, particularly as they
    relate to the forty missing pages (twenty leaves or folios) at the
    beginning of the notebook (a number of pages sufficient to have
    contained the missing text---see the footnote on page 2 in this edition,
    as well as the footnote on Quire I below. In this instance, there is a
    strong possibility that MWS's page numbers "41" and "43" and "45" on the
    first three surviving rectos are alterations from numbers "21" and "22"
    and "23" respectively,
    suggesting that she had foliated rather than paginated her notebook up
    to this point but then decided to enumerate each page (verso page
    numbers "42" and "44" and "46," as well as recto page number "47" that
    begins a new chapter, show no sign of having been altered from
    anything).[^16]

    Surviving leaves of the notebook break off abruptly at the 8th leaf in
    the 12-leaf Quire IX (see Quiring Charts below)---at Dep. c. 534/1, folio
    11 (pages 20/21)---a point in the midst of Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3. That
    abruptness, together with the fact that pages 22--56 are not represented
    at all in Draft and with the fact that insert/rewrite pages beginning at
    page "57" are in the same paper as the rest of Notebook A, suggest that
    there are 35 pages (taking up at least 18 leaves) missing at the end of
    Notebook A.

    There are three places in Notebook A where the numerical sequence is out
    of order: MWS skipped page number "52" when she went from page "51" to
    "53" (see folio 9 recto and verso); she seemed to have made up for the
    error when she followed page "58" with another "58" (see folio 12 recto
    and verso); and she repeated the chapter number "7" (see folios 21 recto
    and 26 recto)---for all of these, see pages 48--51, 60--63, 96--97, and
    116--117 in this edition.

Ruling in Notebook A
:   With the exception of the insert/rewrite pages
    labeled "X" and "Y" (for which see below), all other extant pages of
    Notebook A have a pencil rule (at varying distances from the left edge),
    possibly made by MWS at one sitting, to create a left margin so that she
    and PBS had room to revise the text.

Insert Pages in Notebook A
:   Two insertions into Notebook A, each
    written on different paper, were foliated by the Bodleian staff at the
    beginning and the end of the main sequence of notebook pages (Dep. c.
    477/1, folios 1--3; Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18---see pages 16--25, 32--35, and
    340--341 in this edition). Each of these insertions accommodates new text
    added to text already drafted in Notebook A, and each was most likely
    inserted loosely in place in the notebook. There is also another insert
    section in Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 12--17) that was drafted on
    pages taken from a (presumably) later quire in the notebook. Each of
    these insertions was occasioned by a trauma in the text, and each
    demands further description.

    First Insert Pages (Dep. c. 477/1, folios 1--3)
    :   The first six-page
        insertion was written on three unpaginated consecutive leaves that MWS
        most likely used before she entered "Write Ch. 3½ [altered to 2½]" in
        her Bath Journal on 27 October 1816 (for an explanation of the
        circumstances of this insertion, see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
        that date; see also pages 16--25 and 32--35 in this edition). The leaves
        consist of one bifolium (folios 1--2, with the second leaf mutilated) and
        one singleton (folio 3, a left half-sheet) of laid paper of cream color
        (dirtied at the edges), with the bifolium sheet measuring 315--318 x
        403--404 mm. From the "felt" side of the paper, the left half of the
        watermarks reads "T W & B | BOTFIELD"; on the right half is Britannia
        facing left, over the fancy letters "TW&BB" and the date "1815" in a
        crowned triple oval (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 5--6). The Bodleian
        Shelley collections have two other certain examples of this same paper,
        each with identical measurements and the pair of Botfield and 1815
        Britannia watermarks.[^17] Another example of this Botfield paper
        (watermarked "TW&BB | 1809" rather than "1815"), which was manufactured
        by the Botfield brothers Thomas, William, and Beriah in the West
        country---provides some evidence that this paper may have been acquired by
        MWS in Bath,[^18] where she was residing at the time.

    Second Insert Pages (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 12--17---the "X" and "Y" inserts)
    :   This second insert was written on six leaves that MWS may
        have used as late as April 1817 when she entered "Correct F." in her
        Marlow Journal (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for 10--17 and for
        29 April 1817). Because these six leaves of laid paper have the same
        dimensions, light-blue tint, and watermark that are evidenced in
        Notebook A and because they exhibit sufficient physical characteristics
        (identical sewing holes; matching torn edges; pleats at the inner edges
        of all six leaves, caused either directly by the sewing-thread or by
        adjacent crumpling), they were most likely three bifolia taken from an
        unused (the ?last) quire in Notebook A. The fact that two of these
        reconstructed bifolia give evidence of writing across the inner join
        leads to an hypothesis involving MWS moving back and forth between two
        groups of pages here labeled "X" 
        (folios 12 through 15 [pages 57/59, 60/61, 62/blank, and blank/63]) and
        "Y" (folios 16 and 17 [pages 57/58 and 59+64/65], as well as folio 18
        [an unpaglnated slip of different paper that is described as "Third
        Insert" below]). MWS needed these extra pages in order to revise what
        was apparently Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], a chapter that she would have
        written not long after finishing a "very long" chapter on 5 December
        1816, but the way the name of Safie changes from "Maimouna" to "Amina"
        to "Safie" in these reconstructed bifolia suggests that she did not make
        the changes until April 1817. All of these intersections between "X" and
        "Y" are important because they offer the only manuscript link between
        the last extant page of Notebook A (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3, page 21) and
        the first extant page of Notebook B (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62).
        For the *1818* text that now fills part of that gap, see pages 312--313
        in this edition; for more information on these name changes, see "Naming
        in the *Frankenstein* Notebooks" below; for a visual representation of
        "X" and "Y," see Quiring Charts[^19] below; for the labyrinthine path
        through "X" and "Y," see the likely sequence of MWS's revisions as
        outlined on transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition and as
        evidenced in the photofacsimiles, transcriptions, and notes on pages
        314--342

    Third Insert Slip (Dep c. 534/1, folio 18---from the "Y"\` Insert)
    :   This third insert was written on a slip of paper that was used to link
        the last page of light-blue paper in Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 17
        verso [page 65]) and the first page of cream paper in Notebook B (Dep.
        c. 534/1, folio 19 recto [page 62]). The slip consists of the top part
        of one leaf (that is, a half-sheet) of laid paper (commercially cut at
        top and outside edges), of cream color, that measures 89--91 x 186--188
        mm., yielding estimated sheet measurements of [height unknown] x 372--376
        mm. The paper has no surviving watermark but is probably of British
        origin. The lower edge is roughly torn (below the completed text), but
        the inside edge is more neatly torn against a fold, at which (about 46
        mm. from the top edge) is a hole that could well be a sewing hole
        (though other tears at the inside edge make it hard to be certain). The
        slip (while blank) may have been torn from another notebook, which may
        have been turned to because all the light-blue paper of Notebook A had
        been exhausted. The text follows directly from folio 17 verso
        (completing the word "language") and concludes with a later and revised
        version of part of a sentence that had been written on the top two lines
        of folio 19 recto, which is the first surviving leaf of Notebook B.

### Draft Notebook B

<div class="centered smaller">

| (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 19--37, 39--94=Pages 342--417, 420--643 in this
  edition)
| (With Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 38=Pages 418--419 in this edition)

</div>

Paper, Watermarks, and Covers
:   Notebook B survives as 75 leaves of
    British laid paper, thickish in weight, cream color, with edges that
    were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 310--311 x 199--202 mm.,
    yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 310--311 x 398--404 mm.
    Technically, the notebook was made up into folio format, with watermarks
    in the center of each half-sheet. From the "felt" side of the paper, the
    left half of the sheet has watermarks reading "JL | 1806 "; on the right
    half is Britannia, facing left, in a crowned triple oval (see
    Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 7--8). There are eight sewing holes visible in
    the single intact bifolium (folios 41--42---see pages 430--435 in this
    edition), three pairs at three main stations (presumably for broad
    tapes) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at top and bottom. Glue
    residue at the gutters on the outside leaves of quires help to confirm
    the collation structure and suggest a substantial binding with hard
    covers. When squared up together, the edges of the leaves show traces of
    blue and red marbling that once decorated all three outside edges of the
    closed notebook. There are no other examples of this paper in the
    Bodleian Shelley collections, but a fragment of PBS's "Speculations on
    Morals and Metaphysics" (see Pforzheimer SC 339) seems to be on
    identical paper.[^20]

Date of Notebook B
:   ([?December] 1816--April 1817): If MWS exhausted
    all or most of the paper in Notebook A on or around 5 December 1816 (see
    "Date of Notebook A" above), then she probably began Notebook B as early
    as 6 December 1816. She finished drafting her novel in Notebook B by
    April 1817, and she (and probably PBS) made final corrections in Draft
    Notebook B on 10--17 April and, possibly, on 29 April 1817 (see
    "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for all these dates; also see
    transcription page 419 in this edition for the postmark of 9 April 1817
    on the slip of paper on which MWS made one of her last revisions).

Foliation and Pagination in Notebook B
:   The Quiring Charts below
    (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
    Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook (the reader is
    reminded that there are no Bodleian foliation numbers in the Notebook B
    photofacsimiles, because they were made from photographs taken in 1993
    and because Dep. c. 534/1, which included Notebook B, was not foliated
    by the Bodleian until January 1995). MWS would paginate her notebook as
    she went along, ordinarily at the top outside corner of the page. The
    uncanceled text on the first surviving leaf of Notebook B (pages 62/63,
    the "62" conjectural---see transcription page 343 in this edition) follows
    directly from the text on the slip of paper (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18)
    that links Notebooks A and B. This first surviving page 62 may have in
    fact been the first page of the Draft in Notebook B, but the two missing
    leaves in the first Quire (see Quiring Charts below) allow for an
    alternate hypothesis that the original and now missing pages [58--61]
    actually started Notebook B. If that were the case, then the rewrite
    inserts "X" and "Y" (which begin with a page "57") would have been
    rewrites of what would have been the last page [57] used in Notebook A
    (a verso consistent with page 21, the last surviving verso of Notebook
    A's original sequence) together with the first pages [58--61] of Notebook
    B. Yet another hypothesis (but a less likely one because of the
    existence of the six light-blue leaves that were still available in
    Notebook A, possibly as late as April 1817, to be used for inserts "X"
    and " Y") is that a substantial portion of the original and now missing
    pages [22--61] were actually drafted in Notebook B, in effect requiring
    that MWS used one or possibly two preliminary (now missing) quires of
    Notebook B for her Draft after the last surviving page 21 of Notebook A.
    Of course, all of these scenarios recreating the process of composition
    are premised on MWS having first written that "very long" Vol. II, Ch.
    [4] back in December 1816, then having shortened and revised that
    chapter, and then in the process having revised Ch. [5] once more in the
    "X" and "Y" inserts (see transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition
    as well as the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 5 December 1816; see also
    "Second Insert Pages" and "Third Insert Slip" in the description of
    Notebook A above).

Ruling in Notebook B
:   MWS chose not to rule Notebook B with a
    penciled left margin, but she allowed a left margin on almost all of
    these 150 pages for her and PBS's later revisions.

Insert Pages in Notebook B
:   There is one insert slip of different
    paper at folio 38 (see pages 418--419 in this edition), and there is one
    rewrite/insert section of three leaves taken from elsewhere in Notebook
    B. Both of these insertions reflect MWS's response to PBS's suggestion
    that Victor rather than his father originate the idea of traveling to
    England in Draft Vol. II, Ch. 10 (see pages 416--441 in this edition).
    Each of these insertions demands further description.

    First Insert Slip (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 38)
    :   This first insert was
        written on a slip of paper that was cannibalized from the lower part of
        the address leaf of a letter from William Godwin to MWS, postmarked
        9/[A]P/[1]817[^21] (see pages 418--419 in this edition), providing a
        *terminus ante quem non* for MWS writing this insertion. This date
        actually dovetails nicely with the intensive period of correcting the
        draft that MWS recorded in her Marlow Journal for 10--17 April 1817 (see
        "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for these dates). In addition to sets
        of pin holes revealing that this paper slip was pinned to the preceding
        folio 37, both folios 37 recto and 38 recto are marked by a large
        numeral "1" to indicate the sequence of the text (numerals "2," "3,"
        "4," and "5" concern the Second Insert described below). This slip is
        laid paper, of British origin, that measures 104--112 x 189 mm., yielding
        an estimated bifolium measurement of [?] x 378 mm. From the "felt" side
        of the paper, the watermark reads "GO[LDING | &] | SNE[LGROVE]" (see
        Beta-Radiographs, Fig. 9). The rest of the letter is not present in the
        Abinger file of Godwin's letters to the Shelleys at the Bodleian (Dep.
        c. 524), which does, however, have other examples of this "GOLDING &
        SNELGROVE" paper (e.g., letters to PBS of 12 May and of 4 July 1817,
        both with a watermark date of "1814") to allow the definite
        reconstruction of the missing letters in the watermark of the slip.

    Second Insert Pages (Dep. c. 534/l, folios 41--43)
    :   This second
        insertion was written on three leaves (one still-joined bifolium [folios
        41--42] and one singleton [folio 43]) that, with the same color and
        sewing holes as the paper in Notebook B, were almost certainly
        cannibalized from another and presumably later quire in this same
        notebook. Because MWS wrote this text according to PBS's recommendation
        on folio 39 verso and because she made the first of these revisions on
        the slip of paper evidently between 9 and 17 April 1817[^22] (and marked
        "1"---see First Insert above), she made the revisions marked "2" through
        "5" on this Second Insert at the same period of time.

        The pagination of these leaves is different from MWS's usual pattern in
        Notebook B: folio 41 recto was paginated "101" but at the top left
        (rather than the top right of a recto) and without the characteristic
        parenthesis-like line separating the number from the body of the text;
        folio 41 verso was paginated "102" at the top center in a way recalling
        or anticipating the pagination of the Fair Copy; and folios 42--43 were
        left unpaginated. For the ways these insert pages revise and repeat the
        text that MWS canceled in the original pages 100--102,[^23] see the
        explanation on transcription pages 417 and 429 in this edition. The
        large numerals 2--5 next to the canceled text signal the sequence of the
        replacement text in the insert pages. As I suggest on transcription page
        417, it is possible that MWS made different insertions on 5 or more
        insert slips of paper but then decided to cancel the entire text on
        original pages 100--102 and to rewrite the entire section in one place.
        She apparently began her rewrite after, rather than before, she
        carefully removed the bifolium and singleton from a later quire in the
        notebook, writing the new text on the removed leaves while she had the
        old text open before her.[^24] This would help to explain, without
        reference to a central bifolium, the writing on folio 41 verso where the
        words run over to the still joined but otherwise blank folio 42 recto;
        it would also help to explain the nature of the wet offset ink blots
        that are described in the note on transcription page 435 in this
        edition. For more information on this entire set of revisions that MWS
        made in April 1817, consult all of pages 416--441 in this edition.

### Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2

<div class="centered smaller">

| (Dep. c. 534/2, folios 1--18 and 19--29=Pages 646--719 and 720--771 in this
  edition) 
| (With Dep. c. 534/2 insert folio 30 and substitute folio
  31=Pages 772--777 in this edition)

</div>

Paper, Watermarks, Covers, and Sewing Holes
:   Fair-Copy Notebooks C1
    and C2 survive in a total of 29 leaves of British laid paper, all of the
    same character and size, cream color (now yellowing), with edges that
    were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 223--225 x 176--191 mm.
    (the leaf width varying so much because of careless cutting after the
    drafting of the text into the notebooks), yielding an estimated
    bifolium-sheet size of 223--225 x *c.* 353--367 mm., and a minimum
    whole-sheet size of *c.* 358--367 x 446--450 mm. It can be deduced that
    technically the leaves were made up into notebooks of quarto format,
    each consisting of a quire with 24 leaves (or 48 pages) that were sewn
    at three central stations (the absence of glue residue indicates that
    these quires were bound as single notebooks rather than bound together
    like Notebooks A and B).[^25]

    Each notebook has watermarks split across the reconstructed folds: from
    the "felt" side, the watermarks on the surviving eighteen leaves of C1
    read posthorn in a crowned shield over the monogrammed letters "P & S"
    (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 10--11); and the watermarks on the surviving
    eleven leaves of Notebook C2 read "PHIPPS & SON | 1809” (see
    Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 12--13). The way that the "P & S" watermark in C1
    reflects the "PHIPPS & SON" watermark in C2 (together with the fact that
    the measurements of the leaves in C1 and C2 are identical) means that
    the two notebooks were made from the same paper, presumably originally
    supplied by a mill in large whole sheets that contained both watermarks.
    There are no other recognizable examples of this paper in the Bodleian
    Shelley collections.

    In all likelihood, MWS used a total of [?eleven] notebooks for
    transcribing her Draft into a Fair Copy (for this estimate, see
    "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of *Frankenstein*" below).
    The two partially extant Notebooks C1 and C2 and the [?nine] now missing
    notebooks were quite probably matching single-quire, soft-cover
    notebooks (or exercise books) that were available from many British
    stationers at this time.[^26] Notebooks C1 and C2 give ample evidence
    that MWS (and PBS) fair copied the novel while the leaves were still
    conjoint in the sewn notebooks, for it is clear that the writing on many
    leaves was torn or cut through when the notebooks were disassembled. The
    leaves seem to have been removed from the notebooks by different
    methods: in C1 they were extracted with three hacking cuts, from the top
    edge to the first sewing hole, from there to the third sewing hole, and
    from there to the bottom edge; in C2 the outer leaves (folios 19, 20,
    24--29) were severed down the second halves of the bifolia (leaving in
    the first halves a large stub at the bottom of the gutter and in the
    second halves a vertical wedge-shaped strip missing at the top) whereas
    the inner leaves (folios 21--22, 23) were torn out rather than cut---see
    the photofacsimiles of Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2.

    All of these notebooks would have made a reasonably tidy set to
    circulate to other publishers until Lackington accepted the novel in
    August/September 1817, after which time the notebooks would have been
    disbound and used as printer's copy. With the exception of pages 175--187
    that PBS transcribed into Notebook C2 (pages that MWS later
    re-transcribed, apparently before 3 August 1817), the extant pages of
    the Fair Copy give evidence (ink fingerprints, compositor's initials and
    notations,[^27] and folds in the paper) of having been used by the
    compositors to set the type for the novel. See "*Frankenstein*
    Chronology" for 3 August 1817 as well as the footnotes on pages 647--777
    in this edition for additional information on the disposition of these
    Notebooks; see "Substitute Pages" below for additional information on
    MWS's re-transcription of the PBS Fair Copy.

    There are additional sewing holes (three, four, or five) in the corners
    of the extant Fair-Copy leaves that were almost certainly made after the
    notebooks were disbound. Although it is impossible to determine if the
    leaves were tagged together with thread before, while, or after they
    were at the printer, this rough sewing most likely was done in order to
    secure them together after the printing was finished. (One small piece
    of white thread is still in one of the sewing holes in the last leaf of
    the Fair Copy, the only surviving leaf of MWS's
    re-transcriptlon of PBS's Fair Copy.) Most of these leaves (with the
    exception of PBS's Fair Copy, which did not go to the printer) also
    evidence folds that seem to result from their having been posted to or
    from the printer, and three of the leaves (folios 20 and 23 [pages
    143/144 and 167/168]---as well as folio 31 [the substitute
    re-transcription leaf taken from another notebook] have pleats from the
    paper having been crumpled and reflattened, possibly while the leaves
    were in the composing room of the printer).

    There is one curious characteristic about the pages from the Fair-Copy
    Notebooks, namely that MWS followed an exact pattern by writing more
    lines on one side of each leaf. The extant leaves of Notebooks C1 and C2
    show that in the first half of the notebook (up to and including the
    first leaf of the central bifolium) MWS wrote 14 lines on every recto
    and 19 lines on every verso; she then would reverse the pattern in the
    second half of the notebook, that is, from the second leaf of the
    central bifolium to the end of the notebook. (For more specifics, see
    the footnote on transcription page 649 in this edition: and note that
    PBS did not follow MWS'\`s exact pattern when he undertook the fair
    copying near the end of Notebook C2; also note that MWS apparently
    abandoned that pattern when she re-transcribed PBS's Fair Copy because
    the notebook pages used for the re-transcription had an equal number of
    commercially ruled lines on each page.) What caused or enabled MWS to
    follow such an exact and exacting pattern is not known: it is possible
    that she used some form of template, but the intersections of a 14-line
    and a 19-line page on opposite sides of one leaf do not seem to prevent
    or diminish any kind of aggravating bleed-through or show-through that
    might make for difficult reading. Because the surviving substitute leaf
    still has faint traces of commercial ruling and because that leaf came
    from a notebook that might have been similar to Notebooks C1 and C2,
    then it is quite possible that all of these pages in Notebooks C1 and C2
    had faint commercial ruling that has totally disappeared since MWS
    copied her novel. That kind of ruling would help explain the change of
    pattern at the central bifolium, but that still does not explain why
    there was an apparently random choice of 14 lines on one side of each
    bifolium and 19 lines on the other. PBS's not following the pattern does
    not prove anything one way or the other: he might have ignored faint
    commercial ruled lines in hopes of getting all of the rest of the Draft
    into this last Fair-Copy Notebook.

Dating of Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 andC2
:   (18 April--[?13] May 1817):
    See "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for these dates, for the first of which
    (18 April) MWS entered "Transcribe" in her journal and for the last of
    which (a cumulative entry for 10--13 May) she entered "Finish
    transcribing." In this same Journal on 14 May, MWS entered that PBS
    "corrects F." and that she did "write Preface---Finis"; by 26 May, Byron's
    publisher John Murray had read some or all of the [?eleven] Fair-Copy
    Notebooks (see MWS *Journal*, I,168--169 and 171).

Foliation and Pagination in Notebooks C1 and C2
:   The Quiring Charts
    below (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
    Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook. Ink and other
    evidence suggest that MWS paginated the notebooks as she went along,
    possibly a few pages at a time. Page numbers are centered at the top of
    each page. It also appears that MWS paginated the last thirteen pages of
    the Fair Copy, the pages on which PBS transcribed the Draft into
    Notebook C2, all at one time, apparently after PBS made his
    transcription.

    The Quiring Charts indicate that Notebook C1 began on page 91. If the
    preceding but now missing notebooks were identical to C1 and C2 (each
    having 48 pages), then the Fair Copy of Volume III of the novel would
    have occupied most and possibly all of a total of four notebooks: the
    missing 90 pages would have occupied 45 of the 48 leaves available in
    the two notebooks preceding C1 and C2; and 97 pages (pages 91--187) would
    have occupied Notebooks C1 and C2 (supplemented by one Insert Page, for
    which see below). "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" below
    suggests that MWS may not have used a new notebook to begin Volume III
    (or, for that matter, Volume II) of the Fair Copy---if that were the case
    and if the preceding notebooks had 24 leaves each, then MWS would have
    begun page 1 of Volume III of the Fair Copy on folio 4 recto of the now
    missing 24-page notebook, the first three leaves of which would have
    been used for the final five or six pages of the Fair Copy of Volume II.
    One variation to these numbers would result if one or both of these
    notebooks were 26-leaf (or 52-page) notebooks, a possibility suggested
    by some of the numbers that MWS and PBS entered on the Draft of the
    novel.

Insert and Substitute Pages in Notebook C2
:   The final two leaves
    (folios 30 and 31) associated with Notebook C2, each of which is on
    paper similar to but not identical with the paper of C2, have text from
    the concluding section of Volume III of the novel and were written after
    MWS and PBS had apparently run out of the notebooks that were being used
    for the last sections of the Fair Copy.

    Insert Page (Dep. c. 534/2, folio 30)
    :   This one-page insertion was
        written on one leaf of British laid paper, cream (now yellowing), with
        outer edges commercially cut and the inside (left-hand) edge jaggedly
        hacked just beyond the original fold (see photofacsimile on page 772 in
        this edition). The leaf measures 220--222 x 184--188 mm. (fold at 180--181
        mm.), yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 220--222 x 360--362
        mm., and a minimum whole-sheet size of 360--362 x 440--444 mm.
        Technically, the leaf was made up into a notebook of quarto format, with
        the remaining half of the watermark running sideways at the fold. From
        the "felt" side, the watermark reads "1814," below almost entirely
        cut-away capital letters, the first letter possibly a "W" from [?"W
        TURNER & SON"]. There are no other recognizable examples of this paper
        in the Bodleian Shelley collections. Sewing holes at the fold prove that
        this leaf originally belonged to a commercially-supplied notebook that
        was slightly smaller than Notebook C2 but possibly quite similar to it
        in appearance. However, the possible evidence of sewing-tapes at three
        stations and of kettle stitches suggests that this notebook may have
        been a thicker volume with multiple quires.

        This insert leaf with PBS text (but paginated "187" by MWS---apparently
        after PBS had transcribed the text) was made necessary because PBS had
        run out of room in the 48-page Fair-Copy Notebook C2 and needed one more
        page to conclude the transcription of the novel. After PBS transcribed
        the text on to this insert leaf, it was immediately inserted into
        Notebook C2, as is evidenced by the wet offset ink blots from it on to
        the facing folio 29 verso, the last leaf of Notebook C2.[^28] For more
        explanation on the positioning of this insert leaf, see the footnotes to
        transcription page 771 in this edition.

    Substitute Pages (Dep. c. 534/2, folio 31)
    :   This two-page
        substitute was written on one leaf of British laid paper, cream (now
        yellowing), with outer edges commercially cut and the inside (left-hand)
        edge neatly torn and with very faint traces of horizontal commercial
        ruling in lines *c.* 12 mm. apart. The leaf measures 225--227 x 181--183
        mm., yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 225--227 x 362--366 mm.,
        and a minimum whole-sheet size of 362--366 x 450--454 mm. Technically, the
        leaf was made up into a notebook of quarto format, with the remaining
        half of the watermark set sideways at the torn edge. From the "felt"
        side, the watermark is a posthorn in a crowned shield (top half only).

        This one leaf appears to have come from a commercially-supplied notebook
        (very similar to but slightly taller than Notebooks C1 and C2) that was
        almost identical to another notebook from which MWS used twelve leaves
        on 13 July 1817 for writing down PBS's dictated translation of
        Aeschylus's *Prometheus Bound*, lines 1--314 (Bodleian MS. Shelley adds.
        c. 5, folios 73--84, text identified as PBS's in Barker-Benfield,
        *Guitar*, pages 88--89). The almost identical source[^29] suggests that
        MWS may have written her substitute text in the summer of 1817, a
        conjecture supported by other evidence (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology"
        for 13 July and for 3 August 1817). The traces of regular sewing holes
        in both the one-leaf and the twelve-leaf samples indicate that both
        samples were torn from single-section notebooks of probably 24 leaves
        each, much like Notebooks C1 and C2. On the *Frankenstein* leaf there is
        also a cluster of later, irregular sewing holes (through one of which is
        a fragment of white thread) at the inner top corner. These holes, only
        roughly similar to the irregular sewing holes in other C2 leaves, were
        probably made when this single leaf was stitched to other now missing
        substitute pages. See "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" (as
        well as the footnotes on transcription page 777 in this edition) for
        evidence that MWS actually used eight leaves (fifteen pages) for her
        re-transcription of PBS's Fair Copy.

## Naming in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

The names of the characters in *Frankenstein* are important for many
reasons, not the least being that naming is a ritual event---indeed, a
symbolic event---by which the namer (e.g., the parent baptizing a child)
exercises an authority over the named. Nothing brings this truth home
more than my facing the responsibility of naming the unnamed being
created by Victor Frankenstein---should I denominate him "being" or
"creature" or "monster" or any number of other cognomens (e.g.,
"wretch"), all names that are in the novel, although each is filtered
through the consciousnesses of Walton, Victor, the "monster" himself,
and the De Laceys?[^30] MWS herself avoided giving him a name in the
novel, and after she saw a dramatic production of *Frankenstein* in 1823
she approved the use of "\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-" for the character played "by M^r^ T.
Cooke: this nameless mode of naming the un{n}ameable is rather good"
(see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 9 September 1823). My choice of
name will undoubtedly dictate a response, and I am certain that some
readers up to this point have been dissatisfied with my calling their
"creature" a "monster," a choice culturally conditioned, I am sure, by
the movie incarnations of *Frankenstein*, but a choice in keeping with
both MWS and PBS begging (or, more likely, posing) the question of the
name, in keeping with what MWS said about the monster in her *1831*
Introduction and elsewhere, and in keeping with my own personal reading
of the novel.

I have attempted to be as objective and factual as possible in editing
this novel, and I do not intend to offer any extensive analysis at this
point. However, I will indulge myself in a paragraph and acknowledge
that I teach *Frankenstein* as a doppelgänger novel, one in which MWS
used all of the major characters to reflect parts of Victor
Frankenstein's psychological being. In some ways the novel ends the
night that it originally began with the words "It was on a dreary night
of November." That is to say, Victor committed psychic suicide that
night when he created the monster: his pursuit of knowledge caused him
to destroy love, to "procrastinate" and to "weaken" his "affections"---in
effect to deal his heart a mortal wound, the heart represented by
Clerval ("the image of [his] former self") and by Elizabeth (called the
"living spirit of love" in *1831*, page 25; for the other quotations
above, see transcription pages 91, 93, 97, and 453 in this edition). And
the rest of the novel may be read as an externalization, a
literalization of that psychic suicide: Victor in the form of the
monster actually killed the better part of himself in the form of
Clerval and Elizabeth. In other words, Victor the creature usurped the
powers of a creator: he left his Eden of Geneva and family and fell from
innocence to experience while eating of the tree of knowledge at
Ingolstadt. In that fall Victor became psychologically disfigured, and
the "creature" (who was initially born in the image of his creator) was
destined (with the creative artist MWS controlling this "destiny") to
mirror his creator's fall from psychological wholeness and to die
finally as a "monster." I have merely chosen to denominate the unnamed
with his last name rather than his first.

Even MWS in her *1831* Introduction called the monster a "hideous
phantasm," a "horrid thing," and a "hideous progeny."[^31] By these
phrases, she seems to have avoided both "creature" and "monster"---and
therefore probably intended to implicate the reader in name calling. I
concede the point of many critics (and even PBS) who prefer to call this
monster a "being" or a "creature" because his monstrosity was
"occasioned" (and I choose that word with care) by Victor and by other
circumstances---even PBS in his *Athenæum* review of the novel (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 10 November 1832) referred most often to
the "Being" and once to the "tremendous creature" whose only association
with the "monstrous" was in the "circumstances of his existence."
Although PBS did not quite acquit the Being of his "crimes and
malevolence," he argued that they "flow inevitably from certain causes
fully adequate to their production. They are the children, as it were,
of Necessity and Human Nature." What sounds a little bit like Heredity
vs. Environment is really almost all the latter, because for PBS both
"Necessity" and "Human Nature" (apparently, the nature of other humans;
if not that, then something akin to "destiny") seem to assign more blame
to others than to the Being. As PBS would have it, "Treat a person ill,
and he will become wicked." I can understand but cannot agree with PBS
or with others who prefer to cast the blame primarily or exclusively on
that which lies outside the individual. In short, I sympathize with the
monster and prefer him to Victor, but I also judge that he is culpable
for monstrous acts of murder and revenge---and PBS should have judged him
by the same standard that he used in 1819 to judge Beatrice Cenci:
"Revenge, retaliation, atonement, are pernicious mistakes." Indeed, the
PBS of 1819 would have been a better reviewer of the 1818 novel, and I
here appropriate what PBS said about Beatrice Cenci: "It is in the
restless and anatomizing casuistry with which men seek the justification
or [the
monster], yet feel that [he][^32] has done what needs justification; it
is in the superstitious horror with which they contemplate alike [his]
wrongs and their revenge; that the dramatic character of what [he] did
and suffered, consists" (PBS *Cenci*, page x). Such a sentence reveals
the genius of PBS as dramatist and the genius of MWS as novelist---both
wished to implicate the reader in moral dilemmas, and MWS forced a very
hard decision on her editors and her readers.

The names of the other characters in *Frankenstein* are just as
important for the meaning of the novel. Many critics have previously
remarked on the injustice done to *Justine*, on the more masculine
Franken*stein* opposed to a more feminine Cler*val*, and on *Safie* (a
variant of *Sophia)* standing at the center of this novel about the
dangerous consequences of the pursuit of knowledge. Those who study
these etymologies will be delighted to discover in The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks that MWS entertained and used other names for a number of
characters, the most important of which are Elizabeth, Clerval, and
Safie. I am concerned less with the root meanings of these and other
characters' changing names and more with the fact that these changes
give evidence of the ur-text as well as the process and sometimes the
date of revisions in the Notebooks. (For a recent and extended
discussion of the possible sources of some of the names in
*Frankenstein*, especially a single source for the name of
Maimouna/Amina/Safie, see Ketterer, "Draft," pages 250--274.[^33])

**Elizabeth Lavenza** was called "Myrtella" ("myrtle," held sacred by
Venus, was an emblem of love) in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 10, page 117, and in
Ch. 13, page 148, two Notebook A passages that MWS drafted apparently in
November 1816, one before and one after the 20th (see transcription
pages 181 and 243 in this edition). In both cases the most logical
explanation is that MWS was copying from an ur-text where "Myrtella" was
the name of Victor's cousin and betrothed. In both cases the earlier
name was replaced by "Elizabeth," the name MWS had decided upon no later
than early October 1816, by which time she was writing the name
"Elizabeth" on the first extant page of Notebook A (see pages 10--11 in
this edition). There is another and later place in Notebook B where MWS
may have started to write "Myrtella" when she meant to write
"Elizabeth"---see "M Elizabeth" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, original page
102 (see transcription page 441 in this edition), a passage that may
have been drafted in early January 1817. (For the conjectured dates when
MWS was drafting these passages, see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
November 1816 and for January 1817.)

**Henry Clerval** went through a more complicated series of
incarnations. He was evidently called "Henry Carignan" in the ur-text as
well as in the beginning pages of the extant Draft, but within three
pages "Carignan" had become "Clerval": see Draft Vol. I, Ch. [1], page
41, lines 23--24; page 42, lines 35--36; and page 43, line 8 (pages 10--15
in this edition). MWS would have made this change no later than early
October 1816, and "Clerval" (or the variant "Clairval") was the form
used throughout the remainder of the novel. The abandoned name
"Carignan" has been glossed in *1818 Crook* (page 25) in a note to the
spa town of Thonon that Victor and his family visited when he was
thirteen ("eleven" in the Draft). According to Crook, Thonon had been
recently restored to the kingdom of Piedmont and Sardinia, the second in
line for the throne of which was Charles Albert Savoy-Carignan, whose
irregular Rousseauesque education was a matter of some concern at the
time. Crook then hinted that MWS might have had something in mind with
Clerval's earlier name when she suggested that "these topicalities may
lie, displaced, behind *Frankenstein*."

Not only the topical or the literary stood behind some of the names in
MWS's fiction---she also would name her characters with reference to or
echoes of the names among her circle of acquaintances. Such seems to be
the case with "Clerval," which recalls "Clairmont"---not so much Claire
Clairmont but rather Charles Clairmont, whose interest in languages
parallels that of Henry Clerval. At one period while drafting her novel,
MWS appears to have made the echo even greater, for there are twenty
places in Notebook B where the name is "Clairval" (only later was the
"ai" canceled and replaced by an "e" in nineteen of these places, the
cancelations most likely made at one sitting in April/May 1817---see below
for more on this dating). Because the variations on Clerval's name can
lead to very misleading suppositions,[^34] I offer the following
chronology that best explains what happened.

> [?June--late September] 1816
> :   "Carignan" in the ur-text (see above
>     for explanation).
> 
> [no later than early October] 1816
> :   "Carignan" written and then
>     canceled and then replaced by "Clerval" in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. [1] (see
>     above for explanation).
> 
> [?early January 1817]
> :   "Clairval" was the name in Draft: Vol. II,
>     Ch. 10, original page 100, but "Clerval" was the name later in this
>     chapter on original pages 101--103. This apparently incorrect or at least
>     inconsistent "Clairval" was not separately corrected to "Clerval" (see
>     below for the nineteen places where MWS did alter "Clairval" to
>     "Clerval"), but the passage in which "Clairval" appeared was canceled by
>     MWS between 18 April and 10/13 May 1817 (see pages 416--427 in this
>     edition for the dating of the cancelations), making the separate
>     alteration unnecessary. When an unpaginated insert was added to Ch. 10
>     in April/May 1817, "Clerval" was used (see transcription page 435 in
>     this edition).
> 
> [?early January 1817] and [?18 March--9 April 1817]
> :   The one use of
>     "Clairval" in Ch. 10 (possibly a mistake occasioned by MWS often writing
>     out the names "Claire" and "Clairmont" in letters) may have prompted MWS
>     to change the spelling of the name, for the next nineteen instances of
>     the name in Draft: Vol. II, Chs. 11--17, were "Clairval," each of which
>     was altered to "Clerval" at a later time, most likely in April/May 1817
>     at one sitting when MWS was fair copying her novel. The first "ai" that
>     is canceled and replaced by "e" is in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 11 [renumbered
>     "2" for the three-volume sequence], page 108 (see pages 452--453 in this
>     edition): the dark ink on the renumbered chapter "2" seems to be the
>     same as that used for the alterations of "Clairval" to "Clerval."
> 
> [?early April 1817]
> :   By this time, MWS had decided on "Clerval" as
>     evidenced by the six instances of that spelling in Draft: Vol. II, Ch.
>     18, and by the four instances of that spelling in the extant Fair Copy.
> 
> [?April/May 1817]
> :   MWS altered the nineteen instances of "Clairval"
>     to "Clerval," most likely during the time she was fair copying her
>     novel.

Safie most likely was not in the ur-text, and when she was introduced
into that "very long" Chapter 4 that MWS wrote in late November/early
December (she finished it by 5 December---see "*Frankenstein* Chronology"
as well as transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition), she was
apparently first called "Maimouna," a name that may be traced to Robert
Southey's Maimuna in *Thalaba*, a name that PBS used as a nickname for
his friend Mrs. Boinville and that he used in his prose fragment "The
Assassins" for Khaled's daughter (a precursor of Cythna in PBS's *Laon
and Cythna*).[^35] The evidence that Safie was first called "Maimouna" is
to be found in Notebook B as well as in the "X" and "Y" rewrite inserts
that MWS used to help join Notebooks A and B in April 1817. When MWS
started to rewrite this section of her novel on the yet remaining paper
from Notebook A (and we lack any manuscript evidence for earlier
sections of the Safie episode), she first changed the already
denominated "Maimouna" to "Amina" and used that name four times on
Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page 59 and page 60 ["X" insert] but then
mistakenly reverted to "Maimouna" (only to change it to "Amina") one
more time on page 60. MWS then decided to rewrite this "X" insert with a
"Y" insert by which time she had decided on the name "Safie," a name
that MWS apparently did not use in her novel prior to April 1817.[^36]
She continued her narrative about the newly named "Safie" up through
half of Draft: Ch. [5], page 59+64 ["Y" insert] and then doubled back to
use already existing text in "X" where she replaced the short-lived
"Amina" with "girl" in one place (on page 59) and with the new name of
"Safie" three times (twice on page 59 and once on page 60). Pen and ink
evidence suggest that MWS had stopped writing on the "X" pages at line
25; having reached that point by doubling back, she then began again to
write her revised narrative at lines 25 and 26 of Draft: Vol. II, Ch.
[5], page 60 ["X" insert], from which point Safie was called only
"Safie." "Safie" continued to be the unemended name as MWS finished the
rewrite on "X" and then returned to the "Y" insert and began again to
rewrite her narrative at lines 13--14 in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page
59+64 ["Y" insert]. (Those not wishing to follow all these intricacies
are invited merely to follow the narrative in the sequence I have
outlined by reading the unshadowed sections in pages 317--341 in this
edition.) That all of these changes from the original "Maimouna" to the
short-lived and intermediating "Amina" to the final "Safie" were made in
April 1817 (after MWS had finished all or most of her Draft) is
indicated by the fact that MWS continued to use the original "Maimouna"
in the remaining chapters of Notebook B: see transcription pages 353,
359,
369, 383, and 605 (this last one dating from late March or early April
1817)---in each of these cases, after MWS began correcting her Draft a few
days later in April, the original "Maimouna" was changed directly to
"Safie," MWS having already tried and then rejected the intermediating
"Amina" when she wrote the "X" and "Y" inserts.

There are additional name changes in the Draft (including adding letters
to finish an initial capital) in *Frankenstein* that show MWS's artistry
at work (the parenthetical page numbers refer the reader to
transcription pages in this edition): the professor "M.K" became "M.
Krempe" (page *55*); the professor "M.W." first became "Mr. Waldham" and
then "M. Waldman" (page 57 and note); "Justine Martin" became "Justine
Moritz" (pages 127 and 133 and notes); the child "Louisa M [or ?B]"
became "Louisa [?Caln (or ?Valn)]" became "Louisa Biron" (page 133); the
pretty "Miss Mansfeld" became "Miss Mansfield" in *1818* without any
evidence for the change in the Draft (pages 133 and 135); the rich
banker "M. Hofland" became "M. Duvillard" in *1818* without any evidence
for the change in the Draft (page 135); Victor's mother "Caroline
Beaumont" became "Caroline Beaufort" in *1818* without any evidence for
the change in the Draft (page 177). "Biron" of course echoes Byron, and
"Duvillard" was the surname of MWS's Swiss maid Elise. All of the names
in the novel, of course, have antecedents, and the name "Frankenstein"
is no exception. Most often, it is linked by way of science and
"lightning" to Benjamin Franklin, but Florescu (pages 58 ff.) has traced
the name to the Castle Frankenstein in Germany that MWS and PBS and
Claire Clairmont may have visited during their six weeks' tour in 1814.
This edition may make it possible for new research on all of the names
in *Frankenstein*.[^37]

## Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text of *Frankenstein*

It is dangerous to speculate about the ur-text of *Frankenstein*, for it
could have been very short and inconsequential; and it is possible,
therefore, that everything mediating between such an ur-text and the
Draft was nothing more than now discarded rough drafts of pages and
sections that never had any integrity or identity as a separate text.
However, there are clues in the Draft that MWS may have been copying
from and expanding upon what she called her "story"---an ur-text of some
length that she had written in the summer of 1816. The remarks on the
names above suggest that Frankenstein spent his childhood with Myrtella
and Carignan in that ur-text, and that maybe his mother's maiden name
was Beaumont. However, it should be stressed that every changed name
does not an ur-text character make. Other evidence suggests, e.g., that
the very long chapter about "Maimouna" (who then became "Amina" and then
"Safie") was not drafted or even conceived until late November or early
December 1816.

It is easier to speculate about what was not in the ur-text than to
prove what was there. One way for MWS to enlarge her "story" into a
"book" or novel was to add new characters and incidents to the outside
and to the inside of her frame tale. That is, it is likely that neither
the Captain (Walton from the outside narrative frame) nor the Arabian
(Safie from the innermost tale) was in the original ur-text---and there is
no persuasive manuscript evidence to suggest that they were.[^38] Whether
the other parts of the De Lacey episode were contained in the ur-text,
with a possibly different mechanism for the monster learning to speak
and read, I cannot determine. Everything else, however, may have been
sketched out in one form or another in the summer of 1816. MWS tells us
that the tale began with the line "It was on a dreary night of
November." Reasoning from that fact, we can speculate that the ur-text
had three distinct parts (although it is impossible to determine just
how long each one was): the creation scene; the scenes before the
creation; the scenes after the creation. Evidence for each of these
parts in the ur-text comes from the following sources: (1) MWS's
statements in her Journals, her letters, and her *1831* Introduction;
(2) mistakes in transcription that are best explained as copying rather
than drafting errors; (3) a Draft page or chapter that underwent only
minimal cancelation and revision when it was initially drafted into the
Notebook (suggesting that it was an intermediate Draft that had been
copied from an earlier version); (4) a Draft page or chapter with
relatively full and/or precise pointing, suggesting that MWS and/or PBS
had worked through the punctuation in an earlier complete draft; and,
finally, (5) references in a part of the ur-text (hypothetically
reconstructed by means of the evidence
listed above) suggesting that other characters and incidents were
elsewhere in the ur-text. With these evidences in mind, I offer the
following observations about the ur-text, again reminding the reader
that some of the evidence of an earlier state may merely mean there were
intervening rough drafts rather than an ur-text.

The Creation Chapter
:   The creation chapter (Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span>)
    is the one for which there is the strongest likelihood of its having
    existed in the ur-text. MWS indicated in her 1831 Introduction that she
    began her original tale on [?17] June (the morning after her dream) with
    the words "It was on a dreary night of November" (see transcription page
    97 in this edition). These words may have begun the ur-text itself or,
    over the summer, they may have been preceded by introductory sections or
    chapters leading up to the creation scene. That the ur-text contained a
    description of that "dreary night" and its immediate aftermath is
    suggested by the relatively "clean" Draft: Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span>, which has few MWS
    interlineations and cancelations made in the process of drafting (the
    additional interlinear and marginal alterations were a consequence of
    PBS's hand in the manuscript at a later time).

Chapters (or Characters and Incidents) before the Creation
:   If "It
    was on a dreary night of November" were preceded in the ur-text by other
    sections and if Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span> was mainly a transcription of the creation scene
    and its immediate aftermath, then the other references in Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span> to
    Ingolstadt, to the Swiss diligence, to Clerval, to Elizabeth, and to
    Victor's father, brother, and dead mother suggest that the ur-text would
    have also depicted Victor's adolescence in Geneva and his later
    experiences with Professors "K" and "W" in Ingolstadt. The relatively
    "clean" and accurately pointed pre-creation chapters (Draft: Vol. I,
    Chs. [l]--6) also argue for this ur-text about the young Victor and
    Myrtella and Carignan in Geneva. Two not-so-clean aspects of these early
    chapters are worthy of note here: the rough draft (folios 1--3) that MWS
    added to Notebook A in late October/early November 1816 offers further
    evidence that the originally drafted and "cleaner" Chapters were based
    on an ur-text; and any reconstruction of the drafting process must
    mentally eliminate the frequent and later interventions by PBS in the
    Draft. The existence of the relatively "clean" Chs. [l]--6, however, does
    not necessarily mean that they were mere copies of fully articulated
    chapters in the ur-text. That is, it is unlikely that an ur-text behind
    all of Draft Chs. [1]--7<span class="smallcaps">a</span> (what originally occupied MWS pages [?34]--84)
    consisted of 50 pages; more likely it was no more than half that length,
    which would still have made it possible for MWS to expand her ur-text
    into her Draft without much cancelation and revision as she went along.
    Determining which of the pages or incidents or characters were expanded
    may prove impossible, but future speculation should be based on such
    concrete evidence as name changes and transcription mistakes.[^39]

Chapters (or Characters and Incidents) after the Creation
:   If the
    ur-text contained most of the creation chapter (Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span>) and some of the
    preceding chapters (Chs. [l]--6), it is likely that the ur-text also
    dealt with the consequences of the creation. If we use the same standard
    of a "clean" text for Draft: Vol. I, Chs. 7<span class="smallcaps">b</span>--12, then the incidents of
    William's murder and Justine's imprisonment and death were part of the
    ur-text, a possibility supported by apparent copying errors in the Draft
    (see especially the mistranscription of the name "Myrtella" in the
    Justine section on pages 180--181 in this edition; see also pages
    156--157, lines 31 and 36). The next Chs. 13--14 have relatively more
    copying errors[^40] and suggest that MWS was drafting new material at the
    same time that she was copying some things from earlier incarnations,
    possibly from the ur-text. An index of the kind of copying from an
    earlier text is to be found at the end of Vol. I in Notebook A (see note
    on transcription page 253 in this edition). MWS had finished drafting
    Ch. 14 (the last chapter of Vol. I) on three leaves that she paginated
    153--157; for some reason she tore pages 153--156 (2 leaves) from the
    notebook, canceled the concluding paragraph she had just written on page
    157 (which she then renumbered "153"), and then drafted a second and
    longer conclusion to this last chapter of Vol. I on pages 153--160.
    Although the shorter version originally written on pages 153--156 is
    missing, the extant pages 153--160 reveal what rewritten and expanded
    pages would look like when they are based on what was apparently a
    fairly good draft.

    If, as is likely, parts of Chs. 13 and 14 (which record Victor's
    excursion to Chamounix) were in the ur-text, then MWS probably wrote it
    while she was still in Switzerland, possibly when she was at Chamounix
    (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 21--27 July and for 24 July 1816).
    If that were the case, then in late July and early August she may have
    written the first portions of the monster's narrative, the Draft of
    which dramatically opens Vol. II, where Chs. 1--3 have the same "clean"
    and well-pointed text by which an ur-text could be inferred. If that
    were the case, then the ur-text had at least introduced the De Laceys
    into the monster's life. After that, inferences get much murkier,
    because what appear to have been original pages 22--61 of Vol. II (which
    linked Notebooks A and B) are not extant. That there was no ur-text for
    much of these now missing pages is suggested by three circumstances: the
    missing pages suggest a trauma in the newly conceived text that required
    considerable drafting and redrafting; the missing pages were the first
    to introduce the story of Safie (initially named "Maimouna"), the
    innermost character whom MWS apparently created to expand her "story"
    into a "book"; and it appears that MWS was excited enough by writing
    this new section about the Arabian to announce to PBS on 5 December 1816
    that she had "finished the 4 Chap. of Frankenstein which is a very long
    one & I think you would like it" (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
    that date). By hoping that PBS "would like it," MWS is telling us that
    the Safie episode (and therefore the chapters in which the monster
    learned to read) were not in the ur-text. That all of this text was
    relatively new is also suggested by the rewrite Inserts "X" and "Y" (see
    pages 314--341 in this edition). In short, the missing forty pages and
    the rewrite sections are probably typical antecedents to the kind of
    "clean" Draft that makes up most of Notebook A.

Notebook B is a very different matter, and the very fact that it does
not have a vertical pencil rule creating a left margin may tell us
something about how MWS saw the remainder of her task: that she was not
working from an ur-text in the same way she had been in most of Notebook
A. The evidence for such a distinction is circumstantial, but there is a
clear difference between the two manuscript versions of MWS's 1819
novella "Mathilda": her revised and later draft of "Mathilda," which
resembles something between a final Draft and a Fair Copy, has a
distinct pencil ruled margin similar to Notebook A of *Frankenstein*,
whereas the earlier and rougher Draft that MWS entitled "Fields of
Fancy" was drafted on pages that much more resemble Notebook B of
*Frankenstein*, having a margin with no rule and a text in a greater
state of revision and flux.[^41] It is possible that this distinction
between an unruled and a ruled set of pages might have enabled MWS to
keep her drafts in order as she transcribed one from another.

How much of Notebook B was in the ur-text is difficult to conjecture:
the sometimes "clean" text might mean that the monster's confrontation
with the De Laceys (minus Safie) might have been sketched out in the
summer of 1816---as most likely was the monster's murder of William (if it
is inferred that Justine's trial was part of the ur-text). Proceeding
further down this road would transform the ur-text into a mini-novel of
some length, with only the Captain on the outside and the Arabian on the
inside missing from what MWS had drafted in Geneva---that is to say, the
ur-text may also have contained a skeletal form of the chapters in
England and Scotland where Victor began making a mate for the monster
(Draft: Vol. II, Chs. 11--15---see pages 452--543 in this edition) as well
as of the chapters back in Geneva and Evian where the monster murdered
Elizabeth on her wedding night (Chs. 16--17---see pages 544--582).[^41] If
these chapters were in the ur-text, the "busier" look to Notebook B
(and, in many places, its more inexact pointing) suggests that MWS was
doing much more than copying from or embellishing a well-developed
ur-text at this point. Finally, arguing from the likelihood that the
beginning of the Walton frame was never in the ur-text, we can conclude
that most or all of the last scenes in the Arctic were not there as
well. So after all this conjecturing, we end where we began, with the
suspicion that neither Walton nor Safie were part of the ur-text, a text
that may have contained in a shorter form much of the novel as it is
represented by Notebooks A and B.

## Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of *Frankenstein*

It is possible to deduce that MWS used eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks when
she (and PBS) transcribed the Draft into a Fair Copy that would become
printer's copy. The easiest way to argue that point is to note how close
the pagination of the extant Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2 was to the
pagination in the *1818* edition: see the headers on transcription page
647 (**Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. [V], <span class="underline">page 99</span> = 1818: Vol. III, Ch. V,
<span class="underline">pages 100--101</span>**) and page 749 (**Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. VII, <span class="underline">page 175</span>
= 1818: Vol. III, Ch. VII, pages <span class="underline">176--178</span>**). Because MWS took
painstaking care in transcribing her text into Notebooks C1 and C2, we
may surmise that the same
care and precision were employed in earlier notebooks and that she fair
copied her Draft in the same way, with a new pagination sequence for
each volume and with a relatively rigid number of words and lines per
page, per leaf, and per notebook. If, then, the page numbers of the
Fair-Copy Notebooks (even allowing for the blank spaces at the ends and
beginnings of chapters, a characteristic of the notebooks as well as of
*1818)* were always close to the page numbers in *1818* (which had 181
pages in Vol. I, 156 pages in Vol. II, and 192 pages in Vol. III), then
there would have been approximately 529 pages (181 + 156 + 192) in the
Fair Copy. If the other notebooks were identical or similar to C1 and C2
(each of which had 48 pages), then the total of eleven notebooks would
have proved just right: 11 x 48 = 528. It almost seems too perfect that
the one extra page in *1818* meant that PBS had to find one extra page
(folio 30 in Dep. c. 534/2) in order to write the last page of the Fair
Copy. Such a calculation is, of course, too perfect, because we know
that MWS and/or PBS made additions to the proofs (that is, there was
text added in *1818* that was not in the Fair Copy). And, of course, MWS
and/or PBS may have totally eliminated (rather than replaced) text in
the proofs that had been in the Fair Copy. But neither of these actions
cast much doubt on the approximation here, that eleven Fair-Copy
Notebooks would have been sufficient to contain the text that produced
*1818.* In fact, there is evidence that some of these notebooks had 52
rather than 48 pages---in each of those cases, a notebook consisted of
thirteen folded sheets that made up 26 leaves or 52 pages.

Further proof that the pagination in both Fair Copy and *1818* were
nearly identical is revealed by the marginal numbers that MWS and PBS
entered on the Draft pages in April/May 1817 when they were recording
and estimating the proportions of the three-volume Fair Copy that they
were creating out of a two-volume Draft. The meaning of all these
numbers (see transcription pages 107, 109, 121, 151, 221, 251, 343, and
393) eluded me until I recognized that the Fair-Copy pagination
approximated the *1818* pagination, enabling me to offer the following
gloss for these otherwise inexplicable numbers.

"52"
:   This PBS number on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span>, page 80, apparently
    records the "52" leaves or "104" pages that had been used to fair copy
    the Draft up to this point---a glance at transcription page 107 reveals
    that the *1818* equivalent is page "105." It is possible that the "52"
    meant that the Fair Copy up to this point had used two complete
    notebooks of 24 leaves each, plus an additional four leaves in a third
    notebook, but there is no end of chapter or like stopping point in the
    Draft to warrant the notation. It is more likely that "52" designated
    two complete notebooks of 26 leaves each. As will be the case for the
    numbers discussed below, a deduction based on number of words rather
    than pages would support the same conclusion: the number of *1818* words
    up to this point and the estimated number of Draft words (estimated
    because half of the pages up to this point are missing) would occupy
    approximately two 24- or 26-page notebooks (or ^2^/~11~ of the novel) at
    MWS's average of 285 words per leaf evidenced by extant Notebooks C1 and
    C2 (the estimate has to be for a leaf because MWS wrote more lines on
    one side than the other---see "The Makeup of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks"
    above as well as transcription page 649 below).

"52" together with calculation up to a canceled "156" and an emphasized "180"
:   These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">a</span>, page 81,
    appear to calculate the number of pages that were used to transcribe all
    of Fair Copy: Vol. I, which amounted to 181 pages in *1818* (see
    transcription page 221 in this edition), a number suggesting that Fair
    Copy: Vol. I also had approximately 181 pages). If Fair Copy: Vol. I
    occupied 180 pages, then it would have filled approximately three and
    one-half Fair-Copy Notebooks: in PBS's calculations, one number "52"
    denoted 52 leaves that generated "104" pages (that is, two 26-leaf
    notebooks); another "52" appears to denote "52" pages (one 26-leaf
    notebook); the number "24" appears to denote 24 pages (that is, half of
    a 24-leaf notebook or almost half of a 26-leaf notebook); and the sum
    "180" denoted the estimated or actual total of 180 Fair-Copy pages used
    for Vol. I.[^43] These calculations were very important to the Shelleys,
    who were attempting (in April/May 1817) to divide the two-volume Draft
    into a three-volume Fair Copy, a process that demanded accurate
    estimates of the number of pages per volume. Moreover, the evidence of
    Notebooks C1 and C2 suggest that MWS was preparing very fine fair copies
    to impress a publisher---and that (as a daughter of a publisher) she might
    have been writing to rule, transcribing in such a way (with faintly
    ruled lines or with a template) that she knew approximately how many
    words she was getting to each page, to each notebook, and to each volume
    (Godwin may have been equally aware of such matters when he entered page
    numbers of his drafts into his Diary).

"Ch V- 113"
:   This MWS number on Draft: Vol. I., Ch. 7<span class="smallcaps">b</span>, page 87, was
    not written in the Autumn of 1817 and did not refer to the fact that
    *1818*: Vol. I, Ch. V, began on page 114 (with the implication that
    there was a change from proof to revise, or that MWS got the number
    wrong by one); rather, because the Fair-Copy pages approximated the
    *1818* pages, this number reveals MWS recording in April/May 1817 that
    she was beginning this Fair Copy: Vol. I, Ch. V on page 113---that is,
    113/180ths through Vol. I. (With a little more maths, it would be
    possible to estimate just what day between 18 April and 13 May that MWS
    made this entry.)

"20" and "15"
:   These [?MWS] numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 8, page
    102, seem to be echoed by the PBS numbers of "20" + "37" = "57" on page
    137 (for which, see below), but I am not certain what they mean.
    Although they may refer to the number of pages MWS had just transcribed,
    they more likely suggest that it took approximately twenty pages of Fair
    Copy to transcribe fifteen pages of Draft. That 75% relationship may
    have been become clear to the Shelleys as they continued to transcribe.
    Although the Fair-Copy pages are not extant at this point to offer exact
    percentages, there is a 76% relationship between the estimated 180
    Fair-Copy pages for Vol. I and the 143 pages of Draft up to that point
    (if we, as the Shelleys might have done, forget about the 6 insert pages
    at the beginning of the extant Notebook A).

"20" + "37" = "57"
:   These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 12, page
    137, seem to echo the "20" + "15" on page 102 (for which, see above). It
    is possible that "57" may have something to do with the 57 pages between
    page 80 (where PBS first entered a number) and this page 137---or with the
    58 pages between page 102 (where MWS last entered numbers) and page 160
    (where Vol. I. ends).

"100" and "130" with calculations to a sum of "205"
:   These PBS
    numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 152, seem to indicate that MWS
    had used "205" Fair-Copy pages, an amount that approximates the *1818*
    pages used to this point: 181 pages (in Vol. I) + 21 pages (in Vol. II)
    = 202 pages. This number also suggests that MWS had just finished the
    4th Fair-Copy Notebook (three notebooks of 26 leaves each [=156 pages]
    plus one notebook of 26 or 24 leaves [=52 or 48 pages] would equal 208
    or 204 pages).

"169" and "191" and the sums leading up to these numbers
:   These two
    sums on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62 (the first extant page of
    Notebook B), seem to be estimates of the number of pages that will be
    occupied by Fair Copy: Vol. II and Fair Copy: Vol. III. MWS started her
    sums leading up to "169" with the number "98" and ended it with "97"---one
    of these numbers suggests the now missing Fair Copy: Vol. II, Ch. [VI],
    page *97* or page 98 (a number in tandem with *1818:* Vol. II, Ch. VII,
    page 98, where Ch. VII begins (see transcription page 343, which is the
    first extant page of Notebook B). The sum of "169" either records or
    predicts the total number of pages in Draft: Vol. II (in that *1818:*
    Vol. II had a total of 156 pages).

    PBS seems to have used a similar form of calculation to reach his sum of
    "191," a number that most likely records or estimates the 191 pages in
    Fair Copy: Vol. III (in that *1818:* Vol. III had 192 pages). The fact
    that these important numbers are on the first extant page of Notebook B
    suggests that this page 62 was in fact the first page of Notebook B, at
    least in April/May when the Shelleys transcribed the Draft into a Fair
    Copy (and when they were doing these calculations). This conclusion
    supports my hypothesis elsewhere that the missing pages that at one time
    joined Notebooks A and B were probably from Notebook A.

"310"
:   This PBS number (which could possibly be "320") on Draft:
    Vol. II, Ch. 8, page 87, is most likely a record of just how many pages
    had been used in the Fair Copy up to this point, a number confirmed by
    the number of equivalent *1818* pages: 181 (in Vol. I) + 136 (up to this
    point in Vol. II) = 317. This number may also tell us that the Shelleys
    had just finished their 6th Fair-Copy Notebook: we already suspect the
    first two notebooks used 52 pages each, and the third notebook may have
    had 52 pages, yielding 156 pages in all---if the next three Notebooks had
    the same number of pages, the six notebooks would have had a usable
    total of 312 pages, 310 of which were used to transcribe the Draft up to
    this point. Even if the number were "320" rather than "310" and the
    transcription had continued into the next notebook for a few pages, the
    estimated 529 pages of Fair Copy (based on the total number of *1818*
    pages) minus 310 pages (or 320) already used, meant that there would be
    219 (or 209) pages yet to transcribe, an amount that could have been
    accommodated in the five remaining notebooks (\#'s 7--11), even if all of
    them were 48-page notebooks: 5 notebooks x 48 pages = 240 pages.

A final word on PBS's involvement in the Fair Copy: because he recorded
most of the numbers discussed above and made most of the calculations,
it may look like he was involved in transcribing the Draft into the Fair
Copy at these points. However, all other evidence suggests the contrary:
PBS would not have wanted his hand to be in a Fair Copy that was to be
kept anonymous; and the kinds of embellishments that PBS introduced into
MWS's text when he did fair copy the Draft at the end of Notebook C2
(see Appendix A in order to contrast MWS following the Draft and PBS
embellishing the Draft) are not present in the *1818* text around the
places where PBS made the computations. Consequently, it is more likely
that the PBS numbers are there because MWS asked him to make the
computations for her as she fair copied her Draft in April/May 1817.

## Other Numbers and the Dates in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

The computations that MWS and PBS performed in the margins of the
Notebooks A and B indicate what numbers can do (and reveal), and in
various places in this edition I have made computations to remark on the
blank "spaces" caused by missing pages in the Draft and the Fair Copy.
See, e.g., the notes on transcription pages 2, 6, and 9 for computations
that gloss pages 1--40 missing from Draft Notebook A; see also the note
on transcription page 777 for computed words per leaf indicating that
the two extant re-transcription pages 185/MWS-186/MWS were actually part
of fifteen MWS re-transcription pages (all of which would have been sent
to the printer). Other numbers (e.g., the very exact transcribing
pattern of 19 lines on one side of a Fair-Copy leaf and 14 lines on the
other, yielding an average of 285 words per leaf---see transcription page
649), together with other evidence, lead to the conclusion that there
were eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks. And the average of 285 words on each
Fair-Copy leaf permitted accurate estimates of what was written on now
missing pages from Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2 (see transcription
pages 651, 731, 740--741, and 747). In short, much of what is missing
from The *Frankenstein* Notebooks can be reconstructed from available
evidence.

In other places, MWS used a different form of pagination (citing earlier
pagination) to leave herself a trail through the convoluted Insert
sections "X" and "Y" (see pages 314--341). She also left a trail of
numbers "1" through "5" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, pages 416--441,
revealing the sequence of revisions that she made to her Draft between
10 and 17 April 1817. Finally, the accident of MWS writing on a slip of
paper on the verso of which was a reconstructible postmark of 9 April
1817 sheds a great deal of light on the makeup of The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks.[^44]

The specific and important date of 9 April 1817 calls to mind an
important moment in the text of *Frankenstein*, when Victor related his
story to the magistrate "briefly, but with firmness and precision,
marking the dates with accuracy" (see transcription page 577 in this
edition). As is so often the case, what happens inside the text reflects
what happens outside or with the text; that is, MWS herself in The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks marked the dates with precision, and the
alterations she made in the dates (together with other clues) reveal
that she was very concerned with the chronology in her novel. Even
though Walton's letters are dated with the decade of the eighteenth
century missing, MWS has given enough information for us to determine
three important points about the chronology: that the novel begins with
Walton's letter dated 11 December 17[96] (which is, or is very close to,
the day on which MWS imagined she was conceived);[^45] that Walton's tale
takes the gestation period of 276 days in the telling; and that the
novel ends with Walton's last letter of 12 September 17[97], thirteen
days after MWS was born and two days after her mother died. The clues to
this reading of the chronology have long been available in the printed
texts of *1818* and *1831*---what the Notebooks supply is graphic evidence
that MWS, like Victor, was carefully "marking the dates with accuracy."

A perpetual calendar gives more than enough evidence to establish a
chronology for all the plots in *Frankenstein* (although there is one
major inconsistency). Walton leaves a clue in the outside frame when he
remarks that he first saw the monster on "Monday (July 31st)" in the
year "17---" (see Walton's Letter IV on transcription page 5); among the
years in the eighteenth century when 31 July fell on a Monday is 1797, a
year that is confirmed by a number of facts, one of which (as Mellor has
remarked) is that the monster read
a copy of Volney's *Ruins of Empire*, which was not published until
1791, thereby eliminating all other possible years in the 1700s when 31
July fell on a Monday. MWS left a second clue in Alphonse's letters to
Victor in which it was announced that Victor's brother William had been
murdered by the monster on "Thursday (May 7th)," the reading in *1818.
A* glance at pages 154--155 in this edition will show that MWS approached
this date with considerable care: she first wrote "May 26" (which would
have been the year 1796) and then immediately canceled "26" and replaced
it with "28^th^", thereby indicating that she wished to get the year
right (there would be little reason else for the two-day change).
Eventually, in the missing Fair Copy or in proofs, the date was changed
to "May 7th", a date still consistent (exactly three weeks earlier) with
the year that MWS had in mind, apparently the year 1795 (when the 28th
and the 7th fell on Thursdays). I could invoke Volney again to establish
the decade as the 1790s, but I am reluctant to use that means because
some critics have raised questions about MWS quoting from not only
Coleridge's *Rime of the Ancient Mariner* (1798) but also such poems as
Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey" (1798) and PBS's *Alastor* (1816). That
kind of anachronism, however, is not at all unusual in fiction, when a
narrative that is set in the past might contain a quotation from or
allusion to a later poem. The monster reading Volney is quite a
different thing indeed, and an anachronism there would have been a
serious fault. But MWS was too careful for that fault, and the proof
that the setting of *Frankenstein* is in the last decade of the
eighteenth century is revealed in a manuscript change that shows again
the care with which both MWS and PBS attempted to address this issue.
See transcription page 459, lines 4--5, in this edition for the *1818*
text where Victor remarks that he was in Oxford "more than a century and
a half" after Charles I collected his forces there---since that year was
1642, then Victor must have been in Oxford between 17[93] and 17[99],
and other evidence in the internal chronology would establish that
Victor and Clerval visited Oxford in 17[96]. That both MWS and PBS had
the 1790s in mind is further revealed by their alterations to Draft:
Vol. II, Ch. 11, page 111, lines 24--25 (on pages 458--459 in this
edition): MWS first wrote "above a century before" and then revised it
to "two centuries before"; then PBS more precisely altered the phrase to
"century & a half before," thereby designating the last decade of the
eighteenth century for the temporal setting of *Frankenstein*, a decade
that had personal and political events that MWS embedded in her
narrative.[^46]

That MWS may have created her own private chronology of events in
*Frankenstein* is further evidenced by these Draft and Fair-Copy
Notebooks. See, e.g., transcription pages 15 (lines 31--32), 23 (line
13), 127 (line 25), and 537 (lines 30--31), where crucial ages and dates
are altered or omitted in order to accommodate some sequence of events
that had already been or was being established. In other places, changes
were made not in Draft or Fair Copy but between the earlier state(s) and
the first edition, as a glance at the parallel text of *1818* will
reveal: see, e.g., transcription pages 153 (line 6) and 159 (line 24)
for someone altering the date of Alphonse Frankenstein's letter from 2
June in Draft to 12 May in *1818.*[^47] Sometimes the Fair Copy is
involved in this---e.g., MWS dated one of Elizabeth's letters 18 February
in Draft, altered it there to 18 May, introduced the date of April in
the Fair Copy only to cancel it and settle on 18 May, which became the
date in *1818* (see transcription pages 537 and 647). It is clear
something was going on with these changes: there may have been not only
a chronology but also, and simultaneously, a personal numerology
dictating some of the choices. Most of the evidence suggests that it was
MWS rather than PBS who was making the choices, but there are times when
PBS, as collaborator, was respecting what appears to have been MWS's
plan.

## MWS and PBS's Collaboration in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

A central issue in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks is the evidence they
provide for the degree of collaboration between MWS and PBS in the
making of the novel. The nature of PBS's involvement has already been
suggested in various remarks above, the evidence of that involvement
awaits the reader in the texts of this edition, and the specifics of his
involvement are offered in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" that follows
this Introduction. But a few general remarks are appropriate at this
point in order to give the reader an overview of what might be called
the conception, gestation, quickening, lightening, and birth of MWS's
monster. MWS herself encouraged the use of such a metaphor by which to
understand her *Frankenstein*: in her *1831*
Introduction (pages v, xii) she described how she did "dilate upon, so
very hideous an idea," and she called her novel not only "the offspring
of happy days" but also a "hideous progeny" that she bade to "go forth
and prosper" in the literary world. If, as this edition will make
evident, MWS is the creative genius by which this novel was conceived
and developed, we can call PBS an able midwife who helped his wife bring
her monster to life. His "hand" is in evidence in each of the extant
*Frankenstein* Notebooks, and the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below
demonstrates his involvement in the printing, publishing, and reviewing
of the novel. That PBS collaborated on this novel should come as no
surprise to anyone, because the Shelleys left a long history of their
shared activities as creative artists. They transcribed and they edited
each other's works; they encouraged each other to undertake or to modify
major works; and they even collaborated in the publication of *History
of a Six Weeks' Tour* at a time when *Frankenstein* was being readied
for the press. It is hoped that this edition will encourage someone to
undertake a major study of this collaboration, which extended from the
sublime (MWS's *Frankenstein*; or PBS's later response to this "Modern
Prometheus" in his *Prometheus Unbound*) to the ridiculous (the two
Shelleys engaged in a rhyming game in one of their pocket books, MWS
providing the rhyming words and PBS filling out each line).[^48]

A reading of the evidence in these *Frankenstein* Notebooks should make
clear that PBS's contributions to *Frankenstein* were no more than what
most publishers' editors have provided new (or old) authors or, in fact,
what colleagues have provided to each other after reading each other's
works in progress.[^49] What MWS actually thought of PBS's involvement in
her text we will never know, no matter what methodology or facts we
bring to this issue. I personally prefer to give both of them the
benefit of the doubt and conjecture that (1) PBS suggested and made
alterations to the text of *Frankenstein* for the purpose of improving
an already excellent narrative (in [?February 1818] he wrote a review
that judged the published novel "one of the most original and complete
productions of the day") and that (2) MWS accepted the suggestions and
alterations that she agreed with. What this edition of The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks provides for the first time is the available
evidence by which to trace MWS's developing artistry as she drafted and
then fair copied her novel. Even though she grew up in a family of
writers and publishers (her father and step-mother ran the Juvenile
Library and published books for children), this was her first experience
writing and preparing a major work for publication. The fact that PBS
had greater experience, having seen two of his own novels through the
press as well as a number of volumes of poetry, might have given him a
professional edge in their relationship, but that experience did not
make PBS into a better novelist (his own novels, written before he was
20 years old, have little merit).

One of the purposes of this edition is to provide a solid and accurate
foundation for future scholarship on MWS and on *Frankenstein*, in
effect to counteract the increasing number of misinformed and misleading
judgments about the novel, about the manuscripts, and about the
Shelleys' collaboration. James Rieger (1974) was the first to mislead
when, in his otherwise excellent edition, he provocatively phrased and
overstated PBS's involvement with the text and subordinated MWS to her
husband. According to Rieger, PBS "oversaw his wife's manuscript at
every stage," corrected "her frequent grammatical solecisms, her
spelling, and her awkward phrasing," and assisted to such a degree "at
every point in the book's manufacture ... that one hardly knows
whether to regard him as editor or minor collaborator" (page xviii).
Although these judgments reflect a great deal of truth (and
collaboration merely means to "work with" not to "equally divide the
labor"), their repetition in his "Note on the Text" that then
challengingly asked "Do we or do we not owe [PBS] a measure of 'final
authority'?" (page xliv) seemed to devalue MWS's accomplishments.

More damaging to future scholarship was Rieger's misleading statement
that "it was Shelley's idea that Frankenstein journey to England for the
purpose of creating a female Monster" (page xviii). This judgment has
misled many who without benefit of the manuscript have attempted to
understand the contribution of PBS, who did in fact write in the margin
that "I think the journey to England ought to be *Victor's* proposal"
(see pages 424--425 in this edition). But PBS wrote this *only after* MWS
had plotted the journey for the creating of the female and *only
because* MWS originally had the idea of the trip drop casually from
Victor's father, who suggested that his son take a two-year holiday
while accompanying Clerval to England. All PBS did here was to ask MWS
to change the source of the original idea for the trip, to have Victor
"lead his father to this [idea of a journey] in the conversations"
(PBS's marginal note to MWS) so that Victor would appear to be more
in control of his destiny. When PBS wrote this note, the monster had
already asked for a mate, Victor had already promised to create one, and
Victor had "resolved to fulfil [his] promise while abroard [*sic*]" (see
pages 398--399, 410--411, and 440--441 in this edition). In fact, PBS
probably did not make his marginal suggestion until after MWS had
written the later chapters in which Victor left Clerval behind in
Edinburgh and journeyed on alone in order to create the mate; in any
event (as most likely would be evidenced by the missing ur-text), PBS
was not responsible for Victor's idea of creating a mate, and Rieger's
unfortunate phrasing has misled a number of critics (see especially
"Huet" below).

After Rieger's edition came E. B. Murray's "Shelley's Contribution to
Mary's *Frankenstein*" (1978), which was based on some but not all of
the Abinger*Frankenstein* manuscripts (Dep. c. 534/1--2 only), leading
Murray to conclude misleadingly that PBS was responsible for a "thousand
or so" words in *Frankenstein*---whereas he actually wrote and was
responsible for more than 4000 words. Like Rieger, Murray judged many of
these alterations to be minor: they "merely rewrite what Mary had
written in order to provide a context for a given correction or
addition," or they offered "dictional, grammatical, or syntactical
variations." Murray added, however, that many changes were "creative
additions which ... help to shape atmosphere, incident, character,
reader-response, and, consequently, aid in establishing the moral and
aesthetic tone of the novel" (page 51). Then, to illustrate the way that
PBS fair copied the Draft, Murray provided representative passages in
parallel texts, keying the manuscripts not to *1818* but confusingly to
*1831 Joseph.*

Comparing Murray's transcriptions to the evidence in this edition will
show that Murray, like all others who have ventured into The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks, failed at times to distinguish PBS's hand from
that of MWS. In those cases where I myself am unsure, I have employed
footnotes to query the attribution that the fonts seem to prescribe,
thereby alerting the reader to the problem of attribution. Any count of
PBS words in the Notebooks has to be factored through these queries:
that is, should only half of all the words queried as either "?PBS" or
"?MWS" be counted as PBS's? or should 75% of those queried "?PBS" be
counted and only 25% of those queried "?MWS"? There are other
circumstances that make any attempt at an exact count foolhardy. Easiest
to count, of course, are the words that PBS added to the Draft, which
were then retained in the Fair Copy and printed in *1818.* Also easy to
count are those words that PBS was responsible for when he transcribed
the final section of the Draft into the Fair Copy. Still, each of these
cases involves two different kinds of words: those that are totally new,
having been added to the text; and those that are merely modifications
of MWS's words, some of which are merely relative pronouns: see, e.g.,
transcription page 455 where PBS altered MWS's "source of amusement" to
"source of *observation &* amusement" and where he altered MWS's "that"
to "*which*" (an alteration that frequently punctuates these Notebooks).
Did PBS add two **or** three words to this page (that is, should we
count "which")? Whose word is it if PBS transformed MWS's "men" into
"*fisher*men" (see pages 478--479 in this edition)? Even more difficult
in the counting are those places where PBS transformed one MWS word into
two PBS words, changed an MWS tense, corrected an MWS spelling, canceled
an MWS word without making any substitution, or revised an MWS passage
only to have MWS learn from it and rephrase not her old text but the new
PBS text. Establishing a final and exact count for the PBS words in
*1818* is impossible, although above I have hazarded a number in excess
of 4000.

After Rieger and Murray came Anne K. Mellor's *Mary Shelley: Her Life,
Her Fiction, Her Monsters* (1988), which offered the most extensive
analysis of the Shelleys' collaboration to date. Mellor's study had the
benefit of being a balanced one, for it stressed that PBS's alterations
to MWS's novel "both improved and damaged the text and ... must be
analyzed with care."[^50] On balance, however, although Mellor correctly
judged that PBS was "responsible for much of the most inflated rhetoric
in the text," her Appendix on "Percy Shelley's Revisions of the
Manuscript of *Frankenstein*" (pages 219--224) seems to credit PBS for
many improvements to the text. Consider the topic sentences that Mellor
used to introduce a series of paragraphs: "On several occasions, Percy
clarified the text" by eliminating such things as a "vague comment" here
or a "sloppy" phrase there; "Percy frequently substituted more precise
technical terms for Mary's cruder ones"; "Some of Percy's revisions
markedly improved the coherence and narrative continuity of the text";
"Percy occasionally improved Mary's paragraph transitions"; "Percy
several times enriched the thematic resonance of the text"; "Percy
further developed the complexity of the monster's character in several
revisions"; and
"Percy stressed Victor Frankenstein's unique responsibility for his
creature." Anyone objecting that Mellor gave too much credit to PBS in
these pages is reminded to check all of her readings of PBS's hand
against the evidence in this edition and also to consider that MWS most
likely would have made some or many of the PBS improvements if she alone
had been responsible for correcting the Draft and transcribing it in the
Fair Copy.

If Mellor inadvertently gave more credit to PBS than either Rieger or
Murray, then Marie-Helene Huet has outdone them all in her *Monstrous
Imagination* (1993), which misread the evidence in Rieger and in Murray
and possibly in Mellor and which changed PBS from collaborator to
co-author. Had Huet consulted the manuscripts before publishing her
book, she would not have rashly claimed that PBS was responsible for the
"contrast between Victor and Elizabeth and the suggestion that Victor
should create a female" (page 154). Both judgments are false, for MWS
had established that contrast (what she and not PBS had called "a great
dissimilitude"---see pages 10--11 in this edition) before PBS made any
alterations, and it was MWS not PBS who introduced Victor's decision to
create a female (see above on "Rieger," who apparently misled Huet).
Huet compounded a misreading of evidence when she claimed that PBS wrote
the monster's "final words ... 'I shall collect my funeral pile ... ' "---a 
glance at pages 640--641 in this edition will confirm that MWS
wrote the sentence, and pages 769 and 816 will demonstrate the small
alterations that PBS made to the original sentence when he fair copied
it in May 1817. PBS was not the one who "wrote the dramatic denouement
on the sea of ice," and it was patently unfair to claim that "it is
impossible to assign with absolute certainty either to Percy or to Mary
Shelley *complete* creative responsibility for any part of the novel"
(pages 156, 155). The words "absolute" and "certainty" and "*complete*"
make such a statement difficult to refute, but this edition will supply
enough evidence to indicate the advisory role that PBS had in the making
of MWS's monster.

Huet had many important things to say, and it is unfortunate that she
based much of her analysis on incorrect readings of the evidence. One
good thing, however, that comes from her mistakes, is a reminder of just
how important a manuscript is to literary analysis. This facsimile
edition, of course, is both a substitute and not a substitute for the
original: future scholarly work on *Frankenstein* might begin with these
photofacsimiles, but some textual scholars may need to consult the
disassembled Notebooks currently on deposit at the Bodleian Library. In
some cases, however, this photofacsimile edition may be more useful to
scholarship than the now disbound Notebooks, because it distills and
arranges some otherwise difficult-to-interpret evidence. The mere type
facsimiles may keep future scholars from misreading words or hands or
from conjecturing in such a way as to misrepresent the composition of
these Notebooks. The very complexity of the Notebooks, for example, has
partly misled David Ketterer in his recent articles on the
*Frankenstein* manuscripts. Ketterer has done good work in his
"Readings" (1995), "Draft" (1996), and "Insert" (forthcoming, 1997)---see
"Short Titles" for the full references---but his articles would have been
more soundly based had they waited upon the publication of this edition.
Not that my reading of the evidence is the only way, but this edition
would have made it easier for him to consider, cite, and illustrate the
evidence for his arguments---as it is, his use *of 1818 Rieger* as a guide
makes some of his arguments difficult to follow. I have addressed some
of his misreadings in the Short Titles, in the Introduction, and in the
"*Frankenstein* Chronology," but I acknowledge here that my work is the
better because of the hours that Ketterer and I have debated the
evidence. Such a scholarly debate, whether conducted in public or in
private (in an Oxford pub or in telephone calls between Newark,
Delaware, and Montreal), can improve scholarship, and it is my hope that
the debate that this edition will occasion will increase our
understanding of MWS's *Frankenstein.*

At press time in August 1996, I am benefiting by reading two forthcoming
essays, both of which have been kindly provided me in page proofs:
Ketterer's "Insert" and Johanna M. Smith's "Texts *of Frankenstein*." In
both cases I have reciprocated with suggested "alterations" to these
proofs that reflect my working with The *Frankenstein* Notebooks for the
past two years. For example, while it is true that sometimes only
"tentative conclusions" can be drawn from the Abinger manuscripts, there
is no reason to hypothesize any intervening text between what I have
denominated the Draft and the Fair Copy. In fact, there is unequivocal
evidence to prove that MWS transcribed directly from the Draft (which is
in an "intermediate" state) to the Fair Copy (compare the texts as
arranged in parallel columns in Appendix A; see the false starts in the
Fair Copy that are apparently caused by the handwriting in the Draft;
and, finally, recall that the margins of the Draft were
used in the very process of the transcription to record and to calculate
the pages in the Fair Copy). In the absence of any evidence to suggest a
draft intervening between Draft and Fair Copy, there is all the more
reason to conclude that PBS's transcriptions at the end of the Fair Copy
were his alone. The rhetorical flourishes in these concluding Fair-Copy
pages, where PBS embellished MWS's Draft, not only give evidence that
these words were his but also suggest that MWS was not reading aloud
from the Draft with PBS transcribing her words. In this regard, there is
no evidence in any of these notebooks that either of the Shelleys wrote
what the other dictated.

How and when the two Shelleys exchanged the Notebooks we will never know
for certain, but there is ample pen and ink evidence to show that PBS
read sections of the text at least twice---almost all of the Draft pages
reveal PBS's hand, and many of the pages suggest that he brought
different pens and inks to his editing. He most likely read each chapter
(or groups thereof) as MWS wrote them, and then appears to have read all
of Notebooks A and B at one final sitting, probably in April when MWS
was correcting them. We know, e.g., that PBS read Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10
at least twice: once (possibly in January 1817) he wrote in the margin
to suggest that it should be "Victor's proposal" to journey to England;
and then later (the postmark and other evidence proving that it was
between 9 and 17 April) he read and corrected the pages that MWS
rewrote.

There are times in the manuscript when you can actually "see" MWS and
PBS at work on the Notebooks at the same time, possibly sitting side by
side and using the same pen and ink to draft the novel and at the same
time to enter corrections. We know from Sophia Stacey that in Florence
PBS "at night has a little table with pen and ink, she [MWS] the same"
(quoted in Angeli, page 97)---apparently, these were portable writing
desks that allowed the two Shelleys to work near each other in their
room at night. Evidence of that closeness is on folio 3 verso of
Notebook A, the last of the six rough-draft insert pages that MWS used
to introduce more information on Victor's scientific interests (see
pages 34--35 in this edition). MWS wrote the page in very distinctive
pale gray ink (quite different from the black ink she later used to add
"the science of" in line 18). Because PBS seems to have been the one to
have written "natural philosophy" in the same distinctive pale gray ink
and because he certainly made emendations in the darker ink, there is a
very considerable probability that the two Shelleys twice worked
together on this page between 27 October and 4 November 1816 (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for these dates).

Much more research remains to be done on the collaboration between the
two Shelleys, especially now that the pages revealing PBS's hand in
*Frankenstein* are available in photofacsimile. We all owe a great debt
to Bruce Barker-Benfield who established in December 1993 through his
Quiring Charts that all of the now separated leaves from the Draft and
Fair Copy were once part of bound notebooks, a circumstance that not
only tells us a great deal about the composition of the novel but also
more about the collaboration between the two Shelleys. As these
notebooks were passed back and forth between MWS and PBS, so also were
ideas and phrases that went into the making of *Frankenstein.* We know,
for example, that MWS took wholesale a PBS Diary entry and incorporated
it into her novel (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 23 June 1816),
but James P. Carson has reminded us that collaboration goes both ways:
PBS's significant addition about the "republican institutions of our
country" (Victor here speaking about Switzerland---see pages 126--129 in
this edition), which could not have been drafted until at least November
1816 (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology"), seems to echo a passage that MWS
apparently wrote in a letter dated 1 June 1816. The nature of the echo,
however, is complicated by MWS having rewritten this now missing letter
when she prepared her Geneva letters for publication in the Shelleys'
collaborative *History of a Six Weeks' Tour* (published November 1817).
Related to this conundrum about who echoes whom are PBS's and Godwin's
later admissions in 1818 that MWS would be the perfect person to write
about the "calumniated Republicans" in a book on the Commonwealth in
British History, a subject in which PBS confessed that he was "little
skilled" (see PBS *Letters*, II, 21 and n.).

It should be clear that any analysis of these complicated
intertextualities demands a study of the facts of just who wrote what
when, as well as an understanding that some of the facts are beyond
discovery or resist reconstruction.[^51] Also required is an
understanding of what Jack Stillinger has described as "Multiple
Authorship and the Myth of Solitary Genius." Moreover, a study of this
particular kind of mutual influence
demands facing the issue of what Carson (page 449) called multiple
ventriloquisms (MWS writing as if she were Walton or Victor or the
monster; and even PBS writing as if he were MWS writing as if she were
Victor recording Elizabeth's letter). Even within the text of the novel
(which so often reflects what happens outside the text), Victor actually
corrected Walton's narratives about Victor and the monster and the De
Laceys (see pages 606--607 in this edition); consequently, we are reading
Victor writing as if he were Walton writing about Victor. Victor
himself, then, was a collaborator and an editor: he "corrected and
augmented" Walton's text because he "would not that a mutilated one
should go down to posterity"---an ideal that any writer or editor hopes to
serve![^52]

[^1]:  Called Claire throughout this edition, Clara Mary Jane Clairmont was
    also sometimes called "Jane" by her family, which also included her
    half-brother Charles Gaulis Clairmont (1795--1850) and her
    step-sister Fanny Imlay Godwin (1794--1816). Claire and Charles were
    children of Mary Jane Vial Clairmont (1768--1841), who brought the
    two children into the family after she married the widower William
    Godwin in 1801. Filling out Godwin's family was William Godwin, Jr.
    (1803--1832). See *Clairmont Correspondence*, I, xviii, for the
    succinct statement on these relationships and for the remark that
    "Of these five children, born within nine years of each other, no
    two, apparently, had two parents in common."
[^2]:  The summer of 1816 was the coldest and wettest on record for many
    places in England, Europe, and the United States; for information on
    the strange weather (occasioned in part by atmospheric dust from
    volcanic eruptions during preceding years), consult Clubbe,
    "Summer," pages 26--40.
[^3]:  See "Short Titles" for a complete list of abbreviated forms used in
    citations: *1818*, *1823*, and *1831* distinguish the three major
    editions of *Frankenstein* in MWS's lifetime; *1818 Thomas*
    indicates the copy of *1818* in which MWS made holograph
    alterations; and titles like *1818 Rieger* and *1818 Crook*
    distinguish scholarly editions of *1818* by the name of the editors.
    In order to continue the efficiency of this shorthand, I propose
    that *1816--17* denominate the Draft; *1817*, the Fair Copy; and
    *1816--17 Robinson*, this edition.
[^4]:  As MWS expanded her "story" into the Draft novel, she may have
    drafted some new sections of her novel in now lost manuscripts that
    intervened between the ur-text and Draft Notebooks A and B.
[^5]:  I repeat this list of collators in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology"
    below for 31 October 1831. Murray, "Changes," pages 320--323, lists
    114 substantive textual variants between *1818* and *1823*; and
    *1818 Crook* adds 9 more (see page xcvi).
[^6]:  See Walton's record of Victor's remarks in the revised Letter IV:
    "'I agree with you,' replied the stranger; 'we are unfashioned
    creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
    ourselves---such a friend ought to be---do not lend his aid to
    perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend
    [Clerval], the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled,
    therefore, to judge respecting friendship'" (*1831*, page 16).
[^7]:  The three names of "photofacsimile," "type facsimile," and "literal
    transcript" are adopted and adapted from Greetham, page 350.
[^8]:  In less than six places, I have used the "character" feature and
    superimposed a slash (/) over a letter when the original manuscript
    cancelation and the circumstances of the representation made such a
    different convention desirable---see, e.g., page 665, lines 13 and 14,
    in this edition.
[^9]: This difference has never before been identified and may help other
    editors to distinguish canceling hands in other MWS and PBS
    manuscripts.
[^10]: In those cases when PBS used pencil, I have suggested the medium by
    using Garamond Kursiv rather than Garamond Halbfett Kursiv (see,
    e.g., transcription page 291 for "This chapter is too short" and
    page 301 for "o you pretty Pecksie!").
[^11]: The "w"s in MWS's and PBS's hands were usually judged to be nearly
    identical, but on closer inspection it is clear that the middle
    section of an MWS "w" (the inverted "v") is lower than that of a PBS
    "w," where the middle ascender rises nearly to the plane made at the
    top of the "w."
[^12]: I physically inspected twelve of these fifteen copies---information
    about those in Cambridge University Library, the Newberry Library,
    and the Beinecke Library was provided to me by letter, fax, and
    telephone. I also made
    use of the cut-and-splice photofacsimile edition of *1818 Wolf-1*
    (apparently based on a microfilm of the copy from the Library of
    Congress), and I address the representational errors in that edition
    elsewhere in this Introduction (see "Emendations to and Anomalies in the
    *1818* Text").
[^13]: Although PBS may have transcribed other sections of the Draft into
    now missing sections of the Fair Copy, there is no evidence
    (including comparisons of the texts of the Draft and *1818*) to
    suggest that he did so.
[^14]: As I confess in the "Short Titles" under MWS *Reader*, I myself
    introduced a number of punctuation errors by using *1818 Wolf-1* as
    copy-text for my *1818* version of *Frankenstein* in that *Reader.*
    It seems that texts about monsters can breed monstrous texts.
[^15]: That is, MWS did not paginate the entire or large sections of her
    notebooks either in advance or after she had completed portions of
    her writing. See, e.g., the photofacsimiles on pages 288, 290, and
    294 in this edition: page number "10" and the text on that page are
    both in darker ink; page number "11" has the same faint ink and thin
    pen cut as the text on that page; both ink and pen cut suggest that
    page number "13" was written before the fourth word of line 1 on
    that page was written.

[^16]: It is dangerous to speculate why MWS changed from foliating to
    paginating, but in the shadows of this note I suggest that she had
    first planned to use this notebook for the purposes of a rough draft
    that she could keep track of by mere foliation, that the first forty
    pages were written in a form no rougher than the surviving leaves,
    and that MWS decided to continue using this notebook for the formal
    drafting of her novel, paginating as she went along as she did in
    all or most drafts of her fiction. Such a speculation, however, does
    not account for the fact that the first forty pages of the Draft are
    now missing (for the equivalent in the *1818* text, see pages 3--7 in
    this edition).

[^17]: The first example of Botfield paper is MS. Shelley adds. c. 5,
    folios 45--46 (two singletons, perhaps once
    conjoint), containing MWS's undated fair copy of the added fourth
    chapter of PBS's fragment "The Assassins," the 1815 watermark being the
    only evidence that this fragment had been added to after the first part
    was composed on the Continent in August and September 1814 (for more
    detail about these leaves, see Editorial Commentary in PBS *Prose*, I,
    384; but note that Murray mistakenly identified the watermark fancy
    letters as "TW&B" rather than "TW&BB"---the initials standing for Thomas
    William & Beriah Botfield). The second example of Botfield paper is MS.
    Shelley adds. c. 4, folios 194--195 (two singletons, perhaps once
    conjoint), containing a part of PBS's fragmentary draft materials for
    "Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics," undated (for photofacsimiles
    of and additional information on these pages, see Murray, adds. c. 4,
    pages 218--225, 489, and 517; see also note 20 below for a Pforzheimer
    fragment of "Speculations," textually related to this one, that could
    well be on waste paper from Draft Notebook B). Both these examples also
    show possible marks of sewing holes at their inside edges, though their
    edges are too badly damaged to determine if the paper originated as
    loose sheets or as leaves from a sewn notebook. There is a third
    possible example of Botfield paper (MS. Shelley adds. c. 12, folio 21),
    but it is too small to show any signs of sewing holes. PBS used this
    small scrap of paper (with a fragmentary watermark comprising the lower
    left part of a triple oval and the date 181[ ], exactly matching those
    parts of the Botfield Britannia) for his undated note (?13 May 1815--?30
    December 1816) to MWS that accompanied his cheque of £300 payable to
    "Miss Godwin" for emergency use (see PBS *Letters*, I, 426--427). Economy
    of evidence would suggest that all these leaves came from the same batch
    of paper, maybe even from one folio notebook. In none of them is it
    possible to be certain whether the writing was done by MWS or PBS before
    or after removal from the putative notebook, but the balance of evidence
    favors the idea that it was being pulled apart as a quarry for blank
    paper rather than as a collective repository for miscellaneous prose:
    The "Assassins" material was the continuation of a text started on loose
    sheets; PBS's "Speculations" was so scrappy that their very continuity
    is in doubt; and PBS's fragmentary note to MWS was clearly a loose scrap
    of paper.

[^18]: This unique watermark of "TW&BB | 1809" in the Bodleian collections
    (Abinger Dep. c. 523) is on paper used by William Godwin to write to
    his wife on 11 September 1812 during his brief stop at Bath while
    traveling to Bristol.
[^19]: The Quiring Charts will draw attention to two other anomalies: two
    of the pages in "X" (folios 14 verso and 15 recto) are blank, even
    though the text passes continuously around them from 14 recto to 15
    verso (suggesting that MWS may have accidentally turned over two
    leaves as she drafted her revisions); and the pagination in both "X"
    and "Y" is erratic (partly resulting from the way MWS numbered the
    pages to identify the path through these two groups of pages). Also
    of some significance is that two of these pages (folios 12 recto and
    16 recto), namely, the beginning pages of "X" and "Y" (the first
    canceled and replaced by the second with the heading "another
    Chapter" in PBS's hand) have MWS's regular style of a page number at
    a top corner that is separated from the text by a curved line
    (represented in my type facsimiles by a parenthesis). In both cases,
    however, the number appears at the top left or inner margin of a
    recto (rather than the usual position of a page number at the top
    right or outer margin of a recto), and in both cases the pagination
    would not be consistent with the last extant page 21, an odd number
    on a verso. Clearly there was some kind of lapse between now missing
    pages 22 and 56.
[^20]: It is almost certain that the paper used for the two quarter sheets
    of SC 339 (which are discussed and represented by photofacsimile in
    *SC*, IV, 733--744) originated in Notebook B: the position of the two
    fragmentary watermarks of "180[6]" and "1806" are consistent with
    the position of the watermark "JL | 1806" on the half sheets of
    Notebook B; and the measurements provided for the larger of the two
    quarter sheets (7.8" x 6.2" *= c.* 199 x 158 mm. for a quarter sheet
    = *c.* 199 x 316 mm. for a half sheet) are close enough to the
    half-sheet measurements of 199--202 x 310--311 mm. to warrant the
    likelihood of the source. Although not provable for certain without
    a direct side-by-side comparison of the actual paper in Notebook B
    and SC 399, the link between the two strongly suggests that PBS was
    drafting at least parts of his "Speculations on Morals and
    Metaphysics" at or near the time that MWS was drafting
    *Frankenstein.* Compare the link between "Speculations" and
    *Frankenstein* by way of the Botfield paper, discussed above in note
    17.
[^21]: The evidence for both the address and the circular double-rimmed
    black postmark is minimal, but the capital "M" on the address panel
    is clearly in the hand of William Godwin; Godwin at this time
    addressed letters to MWS as "M^rs^ Shelley" and to PBS, as "P B
    Shelley" (see transcription page 419 in this edition); and there is
    enough of the smudged and partly torn away postmark to use with
    Godwin's diary to confirm that the date is 9 April 1817.
[^22]: The last likely date for any revision would be 29 April 1817, when
    MWS did both "Transcribe and correct F." (see "*Frankenstein*
    Chronology" for that date).
[^23]: Note that MWS always canceled extended passages in The
    *Frankenstein* Notebooks with long vertical lines, whereas PBS
    always used wavy cancel lines (see pages 123 and 223 in this edition
    in order to contrast the two patterns).
[^24]: The wet offset ink blots on folio 42 verso (offset from folio 43
    recto), definite but out of alignment, prove that at least one of
    these facing leaves was already loose in the volume when the ink of
    the corrections was still wet---and they suggest that the leaf was
    loose when MWS drafted the revised text on folio 43 recto (see notes
    on transcription page 435 in this edition as well as the visual
    evidence on pages 434 and 436).
[^25]: The sewing holes of both notebooks, each at three stations, have a
    professional appearance but are not identical: the holes in C1 seem
    larger and more evident, and they are not quite aligned with the
    less definite pattern of sewing holes in C2.
[^26]: There are other examples of 24-leaf notebooks still intact in the
    decorative paper covers in the Abinger collection: Dep. e. 273
    (William Godwin, "Supplement to Journal" for dates in 1793 and
    1795); and Dep. d. 563--4 (from a series of notebooks used for
    transcripts by John Gisborne at Plymouth in the early 1830s).
[^27]: One significant notation, most likely made by a compositor, is on
    lines 14--15 of pages 680--681 in this edition, where a bracket
    (usually used by the Shelleys and the printers to mark the beginning
    of a paragraph) is used in conjunction with "[Vol. III-G121]" to
    indicate that the marked word begins page 121, the first page in the
    new gathering signed "G," in Volume III of the *1818* edition.
    Compositors often "signed" printer's copy, indicating where they
    began and/or finished setting type. For other examples among the
    Bodleian Shelley manuscripts, see photofacsimiles as well as pages
    124, 134 (n.6), and 139 in O'Neill.
[^28]: Later sewing holes at the top inside corner of folio 30 suggest that
    it was later tagged together with the final leaves of Notebook C2.
[^29]: The substitute folio 31 is probably not from one and the same
    notebook that was used for the translation of Aeschylus because the
    single leaf's torn edge and half-watermark do not align with the
    edges and half-watermarks of the twelve leaves used for the
    translation, but the identical measurements between the single leaf
    and the twelve leaves (together with an identical commercial ruling)
    mean that the two notebooks were probably purchased at the same
    time. The complete watermark found on the single surviving bifolium
    (folios 73 and 84) of the Aeschylus Notebook is a posthorn in a
    crowned shield over a monogram "CB[?]"; folios 74--83 each contain
    the top half of the watermark.
[^30]: The day after writing this sentence and the first two paragraphs in
    this section in August 1996, I encountered an excellent article by
    Bernard Duyfhuizen that skillfully addresses this important issue of
    naming. Duyfhuizen also makes some interesting remarks on the way
    that "wretch" supports a doppelgänger reading of the novel.
[^31]: The "hideous progeny" also, of course, refers to MWS's own novel
    that she bids "go forth and prosper."
[^32]: Even something as simple as a pronoun can implicate or incriminate
    an editor---"[he]" could have been "[it]."
[^33]: For an often overlooked, brief, but provocative treatment of names
    in MWS's fiction, see St. Clair, "Shelley."
[^34]: Before doing the "*Frankenstein* Chronology," I was tempted to use
    the alterations in Clerval's name to suggest that MWS drafted all or
    part of Notebook B (where "Clairval" is to be found) before she
    drafted all or most of Notebook A (where "Clerval" is to be found).
    But all other things about The *Frankenstein* Notebooks persuade me
    that could not have been the case. And Ketterer's even more
    convoluted "inward-moving spiral" hypothesis in his "Draft" essay,
    pages 254 ff., is just not to be believed, for it flies in the face
    of all the other evidence to the contrary: e.g., MWS
    beginning her Draft in Continental Notebook A (most likely acquired in
    or around Geneva) and then continuing her Draft in a British Notebook B
    (possibly acquired in Bath); MWS making Journal references to the early
    Notebook A inserts on 27 October 1816, to Notebook A's page "137" on 20
    November 1816, and to the now lost intersection of Notebooks A and B on
    5 December 1816. Ketterer bases much of his speculation on a reading of
    the sequence of the Maimouna/Amina/Safie references in what I have
    called the "X" and "Y" inserts in Notebook B. See my analysis of the
    "Safie" name changes, all of which make perfect sense in the order in
    which MWS made them within a very short period in April 1817---see also
    pages 314--341 in this edition, especially the explanations on the
    shadowed pages.
[^35]: I am indebted to Donald H. Reiman for pointing out these antecedents
    to me. Hogg in his *Life of Shelley* remarked that PBS had always
    called Mrs. Boinville "the presiding divinity 'Meimouné'. Why he
    gave her this name I could never learn. She did not resemble the
    heroine of the Oriental tale in appearance, conduct, or opinions."
    Peacock in his *Memoirs of Shelley* corrected Hogg and claimed that
    PBS called Mrs. Boinville "not Meimouné, but Maimuna, from Southey's
    *Thalaba*" (see *Life of Shelley*, II, 137, 326). For the name in
    "The Assassins," see PBS *Prose*, I, 137. See also *Clairmont
    Journals*, page 424, for a reference to a "Maimonna" who was a
    daughter shaped by her mother (Nora Crook drew my attention to this
    reference).
[^36]: One of the antecedents to the name of "Safie" may be found in John
    Hamilton Reynolds' *Safie. An Eastern Tale*, and it may be much more
    than a coincidence that MWS first met Reynolds just two months
    before she used the name of Safie---see MWS*Journal*, I, 162, for
    Reynolds and MWS supping with the Hunts in Hampstead on 5 February
    1817.
[^37]: For a recent but unverified suggestion about the name
    "Frankenstein," see Ketterer's "Name" note where he quotes "Atticus"
    in the London *Sunday Times* for 30 October 1994: "Atticus" (the
    name that Taki Theodoracopulos adopts for his column) claimed to
    have heard that MWS "decided to name the scientist Frankenstein
    after the nicest man she knew, Baron Frankenstein, the German consul
    in Geneva" at that time. Ketterer confesses, however, that his
    letter of inquiry to a German archivist in Berlin did not provide
    any corroborating evidence of this claim. Perhaps Ketterer or
    another can make further inquiries in Geneva or elsewhere. For other
    suggestions about the name "Frankenstein," see Palacio, pages 93--94,
    n.5.
[^38]: If the Walton story did not exist in the ur-text, then MWS could not
    have noticed or created until later (not before September 1816) the
    set of parallel initials for Walton's married sister, Margaret
    Walton Saville: MWS was writing as if she were Walton who was
    writing letters to his sister "MWS." It is possible that MWS created
    the sister's name of "MWS" (or at least the name of "Margaret") as
    early as September 1816, by which time the outside frame had been
    begun in the missing forty pages of Notebook A; but it is also
    possible that MWS did not create the sister's full married name
    until after she married PBS in December 1816 and officially became
    MWS. We know that "Margaret" was the name in the final pages of the
    Draft that were written in March/April 1817, but it is possible that
    the name "Saville" was not finally decided upon until April 1817, by
    which time the choice of the innermost name "Safie" would be
    strongly echoed by the name "Saville" if pronounced as a French
    name. It is more than possible that the choice of one of these names
    involved the choice of the other.
[^39]: Although there are other places in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks
    where it is much more evident that MWS copied and then canceled and
    then recopied portions of a previous text, consider a possible
    instance of this on page 44 of what is now Ch. 2: MWS first wrote
    and then canceled "The C" and then wrote another sentence and then
    wrote "The catastrophe ... " (see transcription page 29, lines
    29--30, in this edition).
[^40]: See especially Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 13, where MWS canceled lines 16--25
    on her page 138 only to rewrite them at lines 22--31 on page 142; she
    also canceled words in lines 12--13 on page 142 and rewrote them in
    lines 17--19; and she canceled lines 3--5 on page 147 and rewrote them
    at lines 10--13 on the same page (see pages 222--223, 230--231, 240--241
    in this edition).
[^41]: Pamela Clemit does not remark on this distinction between the two
    manuscripts (Abinger Dep. 374/1--2) in her edition of MWS *Mathilda*,
    but she does print the "The Fields of Fancy" in an appendix, thereby
    enabling a comparison of the two texts. Photofacsimiles of part of
    the manuscript of "The Fields of Fancy" may be consulted in Murray,
    *d.1*; another Bodleian manuscript containing parts of "Mathilda" is
    Shelley adds. c. 5---see MWS "Mathilda" in the "Short Titles."
[^42]: See transcription page 561 for MWS's almost verbatim transcription
    from PBS's Geneva Diary (or from an ur-text that had incorporated
    that passage).
[^43]: The canceled "156" in this calculation is merely the sum of "104"
    and "52" without the "24"; and the "17" to the side may have been a
    false start for the sums of "180," one of which is off to the other
    side.
[^44]: Other numberd discussed on transcription pages 9, 583, and 775
    concern the pencil notations made by "R. L." who surveyed the MWS
    and PBS manuscripts for one of the Lords Abinger, providing other
    clues as to what was extant at that time.
[^45]: There is evidence in the form of a secret code in Godwin's Diary
    that he and Mary Wollstonecraft were having sexual intercourse at
    this time---see St. Clair, *Godwins & Shelleys*, "Appendix I: Godwin's
    sexual relationship with Mary Wollstonecraft," pages 497--503. St.
    Clair reasons that MWS was more likely conceived in November 1796 (a
    month in keeping with the birth of the monster), but the evidence
    can be interpreted in a number of different ways. And MWS may have
    adjusted the 276-day gestation period by 13 days at both ends: that
    is, conceived on or around 29 November 1796, MWS started the novel
    13 days later on 11 December 17[96]; born on 30 August 1797, MWS
    ended the novel 13 days later on 12 September 17[97].
[^46]: It is time for someone to create a full chronology of the action in
    this narrative, revealing such important dates as 1789 for Victor
    going off to university and 1793 for the creation of the monster,
    both years resonating with the events of the French Revolution.
    Mellor (pages 54--55, 237--238), *1818 Wolf-1* (pages 340--342), and
    others have attempted the chronology, but some murkiness in the text
    makes them get a year off here and there. (And MWS's change from 26
    to 28 May may have been the source of the problem, for the 27th
    would have placed William's death in 1794, a year more in keeping
    with elapsed time elsewhere in the narrative.) Anyone attempting a
    full chronology will need to consider not only date changes in these
    Notebooks but also the changes between *1818* and *1831.*
[^47]: For additional places where there are changes between manuscript and
    *1818*, see transcription pages 37 (line 22), 177 (line 15), 613
    (line 33), and 617 (line 1).
[^48]: For a transcription of this rhyming game (called "bout-rimés") from
    the Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. e. 12, page 185, see Barker-Benfield,
    *Guitar*, pages 128--129. For a brief consideration of this and other
    collaborations between the Shelleys, see MWS *Dramas*, page 19, n.1,
    and pages 9--10: in her fair copies of *Prosperpine* and *Midas*, MWS
    transcribed and incorporated four of PBS's lyrics that he wrote for
    these dramas in the winter of 1820/21.
[^49]: I have a much better sense of what this kind of collaboration means
    after having benefited from the advice of more than a dozen scholars
    who have read and improved an earlier draft of this "Introduction."
    As I indicate in the "Acknowledgments," one of these scholars, Bruce
    Barker-Benfield, was very much present in the making of many parts
    of this edition.
[^50]: Mellor, e.g., cautioning those who saw MWS's anxiety of authorship
    in her use of the word "author" to describe Victor, reminded
    everyone that it was PBS rather than MWS who called Victor an
    "author" of his own misery and of the monster. Mellor (page 65) was
    correct in her judgment, and now everyone can use these
    photofacsimiles to inspect the unequivocal evidence that the word
    "author" was in PBS's hand in these four crucial places. (See PBS's
    characteristic "r" [and also "a"] in each "author" on pages 228--229,
    262--263, 264--265, and 758--759 [also 813] in this edition---also
    contrast the look of MWS's "author" on pages 55--56 of this edition;
    and even see pages 22--23 where a PBS "authors" in line 6 may be
    contrasted with an MWS "authors" in line 19. Granted, there are
    considerable similarities between the two hands, but the contexts of
    each word on pages 22--23 will train the eye to distinguish MWS's
    from PBS's hand.) Being able to distinguish these two hands with
    more precision will also help to confirm and/or modify the
    fascinating research undertaken by John F. Burrows, whose
    computational stylistics has led to a conclusion that MWS (as well
    as Mary Robinson and Emily Brontë) had a style more resembling male
    than other female writers. However, even Burrows' more moderate
    conclusion that this distinction may "best be understood as
    reflecting differences of education rather than gender" (page S3.ii)
    will have to be tested against new data in which his sample passages
    from *Frankenstein* do not include text that came directly from PBS
    rather than MWS.
[^51]: See, e.g., the different ways that E. B. Murray (PBS *Prose*, I,
    429--446) and Jeanne Moskal (MWS *Travel Writing*, pages 1--8) have
    reconstructed the Shelleys' collaboration on *History of a Six
    Weeks' Tour.*
[^52]: In a final collaborative act, Nora Crook informed me about Angela
    Leighton's *TLS* review (2 August 1996) of Zachary Leader's just
    released *Revision and Romantic Authorship*, a book that I had
    overlooked but that fortunately the University of Delaware Library
    had just purchased and processed. Leader's chapter on "Parenting
    *Frankenstein*" (pages 167--205) deftly counters some of Mellor's
    judgments that PBS's revisions were for the worse, but it
    perpetuates on pages 167, 171 (n. 17), and 191 a few errors (*1818*
    was not published in March; there was no need for caution by Leader
    or by *1831 Smith* [page 274 and n.] in attributing those four
    instances of the word "author" to PBS; and at least part of the Fair
    Copy "surfaced" a number of years ago). On the whole, however,
    Leader provides an important view of the two Shelleys'
    collaboration: he makes the valid point that collaboration need not
    be "imposition"; he demonstrates that MWS was very much in control
    of her own novel; and he judges PBS's "alterations" in keeping with
    the evidence now contained within The *Frankenstein* Notebooks.