*Acknowledgments*

I owe a great deal to many friends and colleagues who have sacrificed
much in order to come to my often frenzied calls for assistance during
the past two years. Unlike Victor Frankenstein, who put his unnamed
monster's pieces together without the help of anyone and suffered the
inhumanity of it all—and even unlike Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, who
had only Percy Bysshe Shelley to assist in the creation of her novel
about the monster—I have had many assistants in the construction of my
monster, and I have benefited from all these collaborations. The
resulting *Frankenstein* Notebooks are dedicated to the three
individuals who sacrificed the most through the long hours it took me to
piece this edition together out of its constituent parts; and the book
is also offered as a tribute to the unnamed who made so much of my work
possible.

My first debts are to Lord Abinger (who in 1993 kindly granted me
permission to undertake this edition) and to Donald H. Reiman (who
obtained this permission and invited me to edit The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks for his Garland series in "The Manuscripts of the Younger
Romantics"). The fully articulated texts in this edition started out as
a skeletal WordPerfect typescript of Mary Shelley's words that my typist
and friend Debbie S. Lyall made from the photographs of Lord Abinger's
manuscripts, a text that I corrected, positioned, canceled,
interlineated, supplemented with the Percy Shelley passages, and then
entered into columns of varying widths to replicate the manuscript. The
technical expertise by which I constructed these pages was provided by
two computer experts at the University of Delaware, Karen M. Kral and
Rich Duggan, both of whom sacrificed great amounts of time to see me
through my labors: Kral, a phone call away, made magic macros that
enabled me, e.g., to move text effortlessly into columns (what were
actually Tables in WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS); and Duggan, in the same
building with me, suffered my frequent cries for help.

Only after my initial formatting of the type facsimile of The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks was I aware that there was room to print a
literal transcript of the*1818* first edition down the right column of
each type facsimile page so that, at a glance, the reader could see
first what Mary Shelley wrote in 1816-17, then what she and Percy
Shelley added and corrected, and then what was published a few months
later on 1 January 1818. Different parts of the "body" of this edition,
therefore, were developed in the very process of its creation, and I am
indebted to Steven Olsen-Smith and Shanon Wilson, two Ph.D. students at
the University of Delaware who volunteered their precious time to
prepare a WordPerfect text of*1818* that could be incorporated into the
edition and run in tandem, line by line, with the *1816-17* Draft and
with the *1817* Fair Copy. That text was then checked for accuracy by my
reading it aloud against the *1818* first edition in the University of
Delaware Library, and I am indebted to Mary Ellen Bellanca, Charlene E.
Bunnell, Debbie S. Lyall, Suzanne Potts, and Barbara A. Silverstein for
all of their assistance in reading: they also assisted me when I checked
the type facsimile for accuracy by reading it aloud against the
high-resolution black-and-white photographs of the manuscripts; and
Bunnell and Potts checked the final layout of the edition. For the
quality of these photographs I am especially grateful to

*xi*


