*xii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

the Photographic Department of the Bodleian Library (for photographing
the manuscripts) and to Debbie Handy from Garland Publishing: only after
comparing Garland's first set of 9 x 12 prints with the manuscripts in
the Bodleian Library in January 1995 did I realize that their cropped
edges and washed-out details meant that an entire new set of 8½ x 11
prints were needed, and Debbie Handy handled all aspects of that
replacement.

The "sinews and muscles" of this edition have been strengthened by the
assistance of many individuals, especially George Miller, Chair of the
English Department at the University of Delaware, who endured looking at
many configurations of my pages as I attempted to get them looking
right. The staff of the University of Delaware Library were always
accommodating, and I particularly wish to thank Susan Byrnteson
(Director of Libraries), Timothy D. Murray and his excellent staff in
Special Collections, and all of the staff of Interlibrary Loan who
obtained for me early nineteenth-century newspapers in film as well as
in bound volumes. Anna Lou Ashby of The Pierpont Morgan Library was very
helpful to me on a number of occasions, as were Doucet Devin Fischer and
Stephen Wagner of The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley & His
Circle at the New York Public Library. Others who made large and small
contributions include Dorothy A. Carroll, Pamela Clemit, Veronica M.
Eid, Paula R. Feldman, Renée Fisher, Nancy Moore Goslee, Hilda and John
Hadland, William Hodges and the staff of Duke Humfrey's Library at the
Bodleian Library, Nicholas A. Joukovsky, David Ketterer, Margaret Kulis,
Danielle McClellan, Anne K. Mellor, Jeanne Moskal, Hershel Parker,
Hélène Dworzan Reiman, Darlene A. Reynolds, Linda H. Russell, William
St. Clair, Wilma Slaight, Johanna M. Smith, Marion Kingston Stocking (as
always), and Jeffery Vail.

Special mention must be made of thirteen professional colleagues who in
June and July 1996 agreed to read antepenultimate versions of my
Introduction and of my *Frankenstein* Chronology. All of them made
valuable suggestions, corrections, and alterations, almost all of which
were singular (not repeated by the other readers) and almost all of
which I adopted. I have truly benefited from these "collaborators,"
these generous scholars who have "labored with" and on behalf of me:
Terry Belanger, Bruce Barker-Benfield, Betty T. Bennett (with whom I had
collaborated on earlier books), Nora Crook, Stuart Curran, Doucet Devin
Fischer, Neil Fraistat, Steven E. Jones, Jerome J. McGann, Mary A.
Quinn, Donald H. Reiman, Peter S. Shillingsburg, and Emily W. Sunstein.
It should come as no surprise that many of these generous people have
also published very useful books and editions with Garland Publishing,
Inc., which I wish to thank for the support they have given me in this
enterprise. Specifically, I thank from the New York offices, Audrey
Leung, Bruce Lyons, John Shea (who worked many long hours on my behalf),
and my editor Elspeth Hart (who has seen many of these "Bodleian"
volumes through the press). Those who have worked with Elspeth know how
wonderful she is—her wit and wisdom, her patience and generosity are
indeed incomparable.

One of my "collaborators" named above must be singled out: Nora Crook
(the editor of another 1996 *Frankenstein)* and I exchanged volumes of
information over the Atlantic by phone, fax, and e-mail between December
1995 and August 1996. Financial support for these transmissions came
from the English Department of the University of Delaware. The English
Department and Garland Publishing also underwrote many more phone calls
between Delaware and the Bodleian Library in the period March-August
1996. For other financial support during my two *Frankenstein* years, I
wish to thank the University of Delaware's Office of the Vice Provost
for Research, Office of International Programs, and College of Arts and
Science—as well as the National Endowment for the Humanities. And for
their support of scholarship in the English Romantics, I wish to
acknowledge the efforts of Garland Publishing and of The Johns Hopkins
University Press—a glance at the "Short Titles" will evidence how much
both publishers have contributed to studies in the Shelleys and their
Circle during the past twenty years.

My first and final debts are to my dedicatees. I have already named my
editor Elspeth Hart, and I wish here to thank my wife Peggy for all of
her support and patience during a very long gestation period: needless
to say, I missed my delivery date by more than a few days or even a few
months. We can only hope that this edition will go forth and prosper and
make the sacrifices worthwhile.


