*Short Titles*

The first group of short titles below provide a convenient shorthand by
which to distinguish various texts and editions of *Frankenstein* from
each other, and all of the titles survey the scholarship that has
contributed to this edition. For many other important books and articles
on Mary Shelley, *Frankenstein*, and her other works, consult the
bibliographies published separately (e.g., Lyles), annually (e.g., in
the *Keats-Shelley Journal)*, or electronically (e.g., the MLA
International Bibliography on CD-ROM). For reviews of *Frankenstein*
published between 1818 and 1832, see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below.

*1816-17* Draft of *Frankenstein* (in 2 volumes): as it survives in
Notebooks A and B in Bodleian Dep. c. 477/1 and c. 534/1; and/or as
edited in *1816-17 Robinson.*

*1816-17 Robinson* Charles E. Robinson. *The* Frankenstein *Notebooks: A
Facsimile Edition of Mary* *Shelley's Manuscript Novel, 1816-17 (with
alterations in the hand of Percy Bysshe Shelley) as it survives in Draft
and Fair Copy deposited by Lord Abinger in the Bodleian Library, Oxford
(Dep. c. 477/1 and Dep. c. 534/1-2).* Parts One and Two. (Manuscripts of
the Younger Romantics, Volume IX.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.,
1996.

*1817* Fair Copy of *Frankenstein* (in 3 volumes): as it survives in
Notebooks C1 and C2 in Bodleian Dep. c. 534/2; and/or as edited in
*1816-17 Robinson.*

*1818 Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus.* 3 vols. London:
Lackington, Hughes,

Harding, Mavor, & Jones, 1818.

*1818 Butler* Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. *Frankenstein or The Modern
Prometheus: The 1818* *Text.* Ed. Marilyn Butler. London: William
Pickering, 1993. [Reprinted in paper as one of "The World's Classics,"
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994. Both the original and the reprint
have an appendix in which Butler prints "The Third Edition (1831):
Substantive Changes" together with "Collation of the Texts of 1818 and
1831."]

*1818 Crook* Mary Shelley. *Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus.* Ed.
Nora Crook. (Volume 1 of

*The Novels and Selected Works of Mary Shelley*, 8 vols., ed. Nora
Crook, with an Introduction by Betty T. Bennett.) London: William
Pickering, 1996. [Crook provides four valuable textual notes: "Endnotes:
Textual Variants" (pages 182-227), in which she prints MWS's autograph
corrections in *1818 Thomas* and the substantive variants in *1823* and
*1831*; "A Note on Spelling Variants in *1818*,*1823* and *1831*" (page
228); "Unauthorized Variants" (page

*xv*


