*xvi*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

*1818 Hunter*

*1818 Macdonald*

*1818 Moser*

*1818 Rieger*

*1818 Thomas*

229), in which she indicates that *1831 Joseph* introduced six textual
errors and that then *1818 Macdonald* incorrectly listed these six
errors as *1831* variants of the *1818* text; and "Silent Corrections"
(pages 230-231).]

Mary Shelley. *Frankenstein: The 1818 Text, Contexts, Nineteenth-Century
Responses, Modern Criticism.* Ed. J. Paul Hunter. (A Norton Critical
Edition.) New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1996. [Among the other texts
that Hunter reprints are: "The Composition of *Frankenstein*" from
*1831* *Joseph;* Mellor, "Text"; PBS's 1832 *Athenæum* review of
*Frankenstein;* and partial texts of the 1818 reviews in *Quarterly
Review*,*Edinburgh Magazine* (confused with *Blackwood's Edinburgh
Magazine* and the review misattributed to Scott), and *Gentleman's
Magazine*—and of the 1824 review in *Knight*'*s Quarterly*.]

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. *Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus
(The 1818 version).* Ed. D. L. Macdonald & Kathleen Scherf. (Broadview
Literary Texts.) Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview Press, 1994. [Among
the other texts that Macdonald and Scherf reprint are: passages from the
works by Volney, Goethe, Plutarch, and Milton that the monster read; and
partial texts of the 1818 reviews of *Frankenstein* in *Blackwood's
Edinburgh Magazine*,*Edinburgh Magazine*, and *Quarterly Review.*
Omissions in Macdonald and Scherf's "Appendix F: Substantive Variants in
the 1831 Edition" (pages 317-359) are noted by Ketterer, "Readings,"
page 34; and "unauthorized variants" in this appendix (apparently
traceable to errors in *1831 Joseph)* are listed in *1818 Crook*, page
229.]

Mary Shelley. *Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus. The 1818 Text in
three volumes.* Illustrated by Barry Moser and with essays by Ruth
Mortimer, Emily Sunstein, Joyce Carol Oates, and William St. Clair. West
Hatfield: Pennyroyal, 1983. [Reprinted in paper, but without the
Mortimer, Sunstein, and St. Clair essays, Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1984.]

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. *Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus: The
1818 Text (with variant readings, an Introduction, and Notes).* Ed.
James Rieger. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press (Phoenix
Edition), 1982. [This important edition (initially published in the
Library of Literature, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1974)
was the first to print a "Collation of the Texts of 1818 and 1831" and
the first to record the autograph variants in *1818 Thomas* (which
Rieger incorporated into the *1818* text). The 1974 edition was first
reprinted (with different pagination and lineation) by New York: Pocket
Books, 1976. The 1982 Chicago reprint, however, is to be preferred
because it corrects "minor errors in the introduction and apparatus" and
lists "some additional 1818/1831 variants at the end of the volume"—the
"Collation" is printed on pages 230-259 and (288).]

The copy of the first edition of *1818* (Pierpont Morgan Library, PML
16799) that MWS corrected, annotated, and presented to Mrs. Thomas in
Genoa in [?July] 1823.

*1818* *Wolf-1*

*The Annotated Frankenstein.* (*Frankenstein* by Mary Shelley;
Introduction and Notes by Leonard Wolf.) With Maps, Drawings, and
Photographs. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, Inc./Publishers, 1977. [This
edition prints a photofacsimiie of *1818*, but the copy chosen for
microfilming (together with a flawed photo-offset


