Short Titles

*xvii*

*1818 Wolf-2*\
\
\
\
\
*1823*\
\
\
\
[*1826*]

*1831*\
\
\
\
\
\
\
*1831 Hindle*

*1831 Joseph*

*1831 Smith*

Angeli \
Barker-Benfield, *Guitar*

process) led to a number of errors in the text, most resulting from
severe cropping when the pages were rearranged. For the fourteen places
where *1818 Wolf-1* misrepresents the *1818* text and/or introduces new
errors, see the footnotes on transcription pages 2, 79, 105, 163, 253,
449, 479, 519, 587 (and 715), 653 (and 757) in *1816-17 Robinson*.]

*The Essential Frankenstein.* Written and Edited by Leonard Wolf.
Including the Complete Novel by Mary Shelley. New York: Penguin Books
USA Inc. (A Plume Book), 1993. [This edition, a resetting of the text of
the *1818* photofacsimile in *1818 Wolf-1*, also carries over the errors
from that earlier edition.]

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. *Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus.*
A New Edition. 2 vols. London: G. and W. B. Whittaker, 1823. [A
photofacsimile of this edition was published by Oxford: Woodstock Books,
1993.]

[Most likely a Henry Colburn re-issue of remaining copies of *1823*
without even a new title page.]

*Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus.* By the Author of *The Last
Man*,*Perkin Warbeck*,*&c. &c.* Revised, Corrected, and Illustrated with
a New Introduction, by the Author. London: Henry Colburn and Richard
Bentley (Bell and Bradfute, Edinburgh; and Cumming, Dublin), 1831. [The
title page is preceded by an engraved title page: Mary W. Shelley.
*Frankenstein.* London: Colburn and Bentley, 1831. A photofacsimile of
this engraved title page may be seen in *1818 Crook*, page 173.]

Mary Shelley. *Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus.* Ed. Maurice
Hindle. London: Penguin Books, 1992. [This hybrid edition, an expansion
of Hindle's Penguin edition of 1985, prints *1831* but divides it by
means of the volumes and chapters of *1818*; it also includes "Appendix
A: Select Collation of the Texts of 1831 and 1818," in which Hindle also
prints "a selection of significant revisions made by Percy Shelley at MS
stage, which Mary Shelley adopted," but the reader is reminded that not
all of Hindle's identifications of PBS's hand are correct.]

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. *Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus.*
Ed. M. K. Joseph. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969. [Reprinted in
paper as one of "The World's Classics," London: Oxford University Press,
1980. Joseph in an appendix was one of the first to address "The
Composition of*Frankenstein*." See *1818 Crook* above for Joseph
introducing errors into the *1831* text.]

Mary Shelley. *Frankenstein: Complete, Authoritative Text with
Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from
Five Contemporary Critical Perspectives.* Ed. Johanna M. Smith. (Case
Studies in Contemporary Criticism.) Boston: Bedford Books of St.
Martin's Press, 1992.

Helen Rossetti Angeli. *Shelley and His Friends in Italy.* London:
Methuen & Co., Ltd., 1911.

B. C. Barker-Benfield. *Shelley's Guitar: An exhibition of manuscripts,
first editions and relics, to mark the Bicentenary of the birth of Percy
Bysshe Shelley, 1792/1992.* Oxford: Bodleian Library, 1992.


