*xviii*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

Barker-Benfield, "Visits"

Bruce Barker-Benfield. "Shelley's Bodleian Visits,” 12 (1987): 381-399.

*The Bodleian Library Record*

Bentley Archives

*Bentley List*

Burrows\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
*Byron L&J*

*Byron Works*

Carson

*Clairmont Correspondence*

*Clairmont Journals*\
\
\
Clubbe, "Evidence" \
\
\
Clubbe, "Summer"

Crouch

"The Archives of Richard Bentley & Son 1829-1898": 116 reels of
microfilm (55 from the British Library; 57 from University of Illinois
Library; 4 from UCLA Library) accompanied by *Index to the archives of
Richard Bentley & Son 1829-1898*, compiled by Alison Ingram. Cambridge:
Chadwyck-Healey; Teaneck, N.J.: Somerset House, 1977.

*A List of the Principal Publications Issued from New Burlington Street
during the Year 1831.* London: Richard Bentley and Son, November, 1893.

John F. Burrows. "Noisy Signals? or Signals in the Noise?" *ACH-ALLC*
Conference Abstracts, pages S3.i-iii. [These three pages, which offer a
summary of a paper delivered in June 1993 at Georgetown University and
which were published in the Conference Proceedings of the [US]
Association for Computers and the Humanities and the [UK] Association
for Literary and Linguistic Computing, have not been published in an
expanded form. For related texts by Burrows, none of which does quite
the same thing with MWS, see his "Not Unless You Ask Nicely: The
Interpretative Nexus Between Analysis and Information," *Literary and
Linguistic Computing* 7 (1992): 91-109; and "Computers and the Study of
Literature," in *Computers and Written Texts*, ed. Christopher S. Butler
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), pages 167-204.]

*Byron's Letters and Journals.* Ed. Leslie A. Marchand. 12 vols.
Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1973-1982.
Supplementary Volume: Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1994.

*Lord Byron: The Complete Poetical Works.* Ed. Jerome J. McGann. 7 vols.
Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1980-1993.

James P. Carson. "Bringing the Author Forward: *Frankenstein* Through
Mary Shelley's Letters," *Criticism* 30 (1988): 431-453.

*The Clairmont Correspondence: Letters of Claire Clairmont, Charles
Clairmont, and Fanny Imlay Godwin.* Ed. Marion Kingston Stocking. 2
vols. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995.

*The Journals of Claire Clairmont.* Ed. Marion Kingston Stocking, with
the assistance of David Mackensie Stocking. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1968.

John Clubbe. "Mary Shelley as Autobiographer: The Evidence of the 1831
Introduction to *Frankenstein*,"*The Wordsworth Circle* 12 (1981):
102-106.

John Clubbe. "The Tempest-toss'd Summer of 1816: Mary Shelley's
*Frankenstein*,"*The Byron Journal* 19 (1991): 26-40.

Laura E. Crouch. "Davy's *A Discourse, Introductory to A Course of
Lectures on Chemistry*:*A* Possible Scientific Source of
*Frankenstein*,"*Keats-Shelley Journal* 27 (1978): 35-44.


