Short Titles

*xix*

Duyfhuizen Erkelenz\
Florescu

Forry

*Gisborne & Williams*

Glut

Godwin Diaries

Greetham

*Grove Diaries*

Grylls

Hansard

Hawkins

Huet

*Hunt Correspondence*

Bernard Duyfhuizen. "Periphrastic Naming in Mary Shelley's
*Frankenstein*,"*^^Studies in the Novel* 27 (1995): 477-492.

*The Geneva Notebook of Percy Bysshe Shelley: Bodleian MS. Shelley adds.
e. 16 and MS. Shelley adds. c. 4, Folios 63, 65, 71, and 72.* Ed.
Michael Erkelenz. (The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume XI.) New
York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1992.

Radu Florescu. *In Search of Frankenstein.* Boston: New York Graphic
Society, 1975.

Steven Earl Forry. *Hideous Progenies: Dramatizations of* Frankenstein
*from Mary Shelley to the Present.* Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1990.

*Maria Gisborne & Edward E. Williams, Shelley's Friends: Their Journals
and Letters.* Ed. Frederick L. Jones. Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1951.

Donald F. Glut. *The* Frankenstein *Catalog: Being a Comprehensive
Listing of Novels, Translations, Adaptations, Stories, Critical Works,
Popular Articles, Series, Fumetti, Verse, Stage Plays, Films, Cartoons,
Puppetry, Radio & Television Programs, Comics, Satire & Humor, Spoken &
Musical Recordings, Tapes, and Sheet Music Featuring Frankenstein's
Monster and/or Descended from Mary Shelley's Novel.* Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers, 1984.

Dep. e. 196-227, Bodleian Library, Oxford.

D. C. Greetham. *Textual Scholarship: An Introduction.* (Garland
Reference Library of the Humanities, Volume 1417.) New York: Garland
Publishing, Inc., 1994.

*The Grove Dairies: The Rise and Fall of an English Family 1809-1925.*
Ed. Desmond Hawkins. Stanbridge, Wimborne, Dorset: The Dovecote Press
(with the University of Delaware Press), 1995.

R. Glynn Grylls. *Mary Shelley: A Biography.* London: Oxford University
Press, 1938. [Appendix E reprints short extracts from the 1818 reviews
of *Frankenstein* in *Quarterly Review*,*Edinburgh Magazine*, and
*Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine* (pages 315-321).]

*The Parliamentary Debates . . . New Series . . . Vol X. Comprising the
Period from the Third Day of February, to the Twenty-Ninth Day of March,
1824.* London: Printed by T. C. Hansard, 1824.

Desmond Hawkins. *Shelley's First Love.* London: Kyle Cathie/Hamden,
Conn.: Archon Books, 1992.

Marie-Hélène Huet. *Monstrous Imagination.* Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1993.

*The Correspondence of Leigh Hunt.* Edited by His Eldest Son. 2 vols.
London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1862.


