***XX***

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

Ketterer, *Creation*

Ketterer, "Draft"

Ketterer, "Insert"

Ketterer, "Name" Ketterer, "Readings"\
\
LaValley

Leader\
\
\
*Life of Shelley*\
\
\
\
\
Lyles\
\
\
Macdonald, *Polidori \
\
\
*Matthews

David Ketterer. *Frankenstein's Creation: The Book, The Monster, and
Human Reality.* (ELS Monograph Series No. 16.) University of Victoria:
English Literary Studies, 1979.

David Ketterer. "(De)Composing *Frankenstein*: The Import of Altered
Character Names in the Last Draft," *Studies in Bibliography* 49 (1996):
232-276. [Some of the errors in this article are corrected in Ketterer's
forthcoming "Insert."]

David Ketterer. Page proofs of "Frankenstein's 'Conversion' from Natural
Magic to Modern Science—and a *Shifted* (and Converted) Last Draft
Insert"—to be published in *Science-Fiction Studies* 23 (March 1997):
1-16. [In this article Ketterer will correct some of his earlier
mistakes in "Readings" and in "Draft"; in July and August 1996, he and I
had lengthy conversations about some of his judgments in these page
proofs; at my press time, I expect that most of these judgments will be
in accord with the evidence in *1816-17 Robinson*.]

David Ketterer. "Frankenstein: The Source of a Name?" *Science-Fiction
Studies* 22 (1995): 455-456.

David Ketterer. "The Corrected *Frankenstein*: Twelve Preferred Readings
in the Last Draft," *English Language Notes* 33, i (September 1995):
23-35. [Each of these emendations is addressed by footnotes in *1816-17
Robinson*—the six that Robinson judges wrong or unnecessary are on
transcription pages 223, 329, 379, 381, 469, and 535; Ketterer himself
in "Insert" recants on one of these emendations. For other references to
Ketterer's emendations, see the footnotes on transcription pages 105,
120, 451, 537, 605, 633, 637, 735, and 757 in *1816-17 Robinson*.]

Albert J. LaValley. "The Stage and Film Children of*Frankenstein*: A
Survey," in *The Endurance of* Frankenstein*:* *Essays on Mary Shelley's
Novel*, ed. George Levine and U. C. Knoepflmacher (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1979), pages 243-289.

Zachary Leader. *Revision and Romantic Authorship.* Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1996.

*The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley As Comprised in* The Life of Shelley
*by Thomas Jefferson Hogg;* The Recollections of Shelley & Byron *by
Edward John Trelawny;* Memoirs of Shelley *by Thomas Love Peacock.* Ed.
Humbert Wolfe. 2 vols. London: J. M. Dent and Sons Limited.

W. H. Lyles. *Mary Shelley: An Annotated Bibliography.* (Garland
Reference Library of the Humanities, Volume 22.) New York: Garland
Publishing, Inc., 1975.

D. L. Macdonald. *Poor Polidori: A Critical Biography of the Author of*
The Vampyre. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991.

G. M. Matthews, "Whose Little Footsteps? Three Shelley Pieces
Re-Addressed," in *The Evidence of the Imagination: Studies of
Interactions between Life and Art*


