Short Titles

*xxi*

Medwin

Mellor

Mellor, "Text"

Murray, *adds. c. 4*

Murray, "Changes"

Murray, "Contribution"

Murray, *d. 1*

MWS *Dramas*\
\
\
\
\
\
MWS *History*

MWS *Journal*

*in English Romantic Literature*, ed. Donald H. Reiman, Michael C. Jaye,
and Betty T. Bennett, with the assistance of Doucet Devin Fischer and
Ricki B. Herzfeld (New York: New York University Press, 1978), pages
236-263.

Thomas Medwin. *The Life of Percy Bysshe Shelley* ("Revised Life"). With
an Introduction and Commentary by H. Buxton Forman. London: Oxford
University Press, 1913.

Anne K. Mellor. *Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters.* New
York: Methuen, 1988. [Mellor treats of the collaboration between MWS and
PBS in her third chapter, "My Hideous Progeny," as well as in her
appendix, "Percy Shelley's Revisions of the Manuscript of
*Frankenstein*."]

Anne K. Mellor. "Choosing a Text of *Frankenstein* to Teach," in
*Approaches to Teaching Shelley's* Frankenstein, ed. Stephen C. Behrendt
(New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1990), pages
31-37.

*Miscellaneous Poetry, Prose and Translations from Bodleian MS. Shelley
adds. c. 4, etc.: Including fair copies of "Misery.*—*a fragment," "Ode
to Naples," "To a faded violet," "Letter on Richard Carlisle," "Una
Favola"; Drafts of "Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics," "The
Coliseum," "On Vegetarianism"; Translations of Goethe's "Faust"; Along
with Fifty Beta-radiograph Reproductions of Relevant Watermarks.* Ed. E.
B. Murray. (The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume XXI.) New York:
Garland Publishing, Inc., 1995.

E. B. Murray. "Changes in the 1823 Edition of *Frankenstein*," *The
Library*, 6th Series, 3 (1981): 320-327.

E. B. Murray. "Shelley's Contribution to Mary's
*Frankenstein*,'"*Keats-Shelley Memorial Bulletin* 29 (1978): 50-68.

*A Facsimile of Bodleian MS. Shelley d. 1, Including Drafts of*
Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics, A Defence of Poetry, Ode to
Naples, The Witch of Atlas, Epipsychidion, *and Mary Wollstonecraft
Shelley's* The Fields of Fancy/Mathilda, *together with minor poems,
fragments, and prose writings.* Ed. E. B. Murray. Parts One and Two.
(The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume IV.) New York: Garland
Publishing, Inc., 1988.

*Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley: Mythological Dramas:* Proserpine *and*
Midas, *Bodleian MS. Shelley d. 2.* Ed. Charles E. Robinson. [Together
with *Relation of the Death of the Family of the Cenci, Bodleian MS.
Shelley adds. e. 13*, ed. Betty T. Bennett.] (The Bodleian Shelley
Manuscripts, Volume X.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1992.

*History of a Six Weeks' Tour through a Part of France, Switzerland,
Germany, and Holland: with Letters Descriptive of a Sail round the Lake
of Geneva, and of the Glaciers of Chamouni.* London: T. Hookham, Jun.,
and C. and J. Ollier, 1817. [A photofacsimile of this edition was
published by Oxford: Woodstock Books, 1989.]

*The Journals of Mary Shelley.* Ed. Paula R. Feldman and Diana
Scott-Kilvert. 2


