*xxii*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

MWS *Letters*

MWS *Mathilda*\
\
\
\
\
\
MWS "Mathilda"

MWS *Reader*\
\
\
\
\
\
MWS *Selected Letters \
\
\
\
*MWS *Tales*

MWS *Travel Writing*

Nitchie

*OED*

Ollier

O'Neill

vols. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1987. [Reprinted in paper, with
corrections,

Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995.]

*The Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley.* Ed. Betty T. Bennett. 3
vols. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980-1988.

Mary Shelley. *Matilda, Dramas, Reviews & Essays, Prefaces & Notes.* Ed.
Pamela Clemit. (Volume 2 of *The Novels and Selected Works of Mary
Shelley*, 8 vols., ed. Nora Crook, with an Introduction by Betty T.
Bennett.) London: William Pickering, 1996. [I prefer the short title of
"Mathilda" warranted by the manuscript.]

Drafts of MWS's "The Fields of Fancy" (Abinger Dep. d. 374/2) and
"Mathilda" (Abinger Dep. d. 374/1), supplemented by insertions from
Bodleian MS. d. 1 and Shelley adds. c. 5, Bodleian Library, Oxford.

*The Mary Shelley Reader: containing* Frankenstein, Mathilda, *Tales and
Stories, Essays and Reviews, and Letters.* Ed. Betty T. Bennett and
Charles E. Robinson. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990. [The text of
*Frankenstein* in this volume has some errors in punctuation because
Robinson based the text on the photofacsimile of *1818* in *1818 Wolf-1*
that he has since discovered to have been flawed.]

*Selected Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley.* Ed. Betty T. Bennett.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995.

*Mary Shelley: Collected Tales and Stories, with Original Engravings.*
Ed. Charles E. Robinson. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1976. [Reprinted in paper, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1990.]

Mary Shelley. *Travel Writing.* Ed. Jeanne Moskal. (Volume 8 of *The
Novels and Selected Works of Mary Shelley*, 8 vols., ed. Nora Crook,
with an Introduction by Betty T. Bennett.) London: William Pickering,
1996.

Elizabeth Nitchie. *Mary Shelley: Author of "Frankenstein."* New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1953. [Appendix IV (pages
218-231) reprints Nitchie's *South Atlantic Quarterly* article, "The
Stage History *of Frankenstein*."]

*Oxford English Dictionary.*

[Edmund Ollier.] "A Literary Publisher," *Temple Bar* 58 (1880):
243-252.

*The* Defence of Poetry *Fair Copies: A Facsimile of Bodleian MSS.
Shelley e. 6 and adds. d. 8 including: A Defence of Poetry, A Facsimile
of the Fair-Copy Transcript By Mary W. Shelley, with Corrections by
Percy Bysshe Shelley (Bodleian MS. Shelley e. 6); and A Defence of
Poetry, The Banquet Translated from Plato, Essay on Love, A Facsimile of
the Fair-Copy Transcripts by Mary W. Shelley (Bodleian MS. Shelley adds.
d. 8).* Ed. Michael O'Neill. (The Bodleian Shelley Manuscripts, Volume
XX.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1994.


