Short Titles

*x**xiii*

Palacio Paul

PBS *Alastor*

PBS *Cenci*

PBS *Letters*

PBS *Poems*

PBS *Prose*\
PBS *Works\
Peacock Works*

Peck

*Polidori Diary Polidori Fiction*

Reynolds\
*Robinson Diary*\
Robinson, "Ollier"

Jean de Palacio. *Mary Shelley dans son œuvre: Contribution aux études
shelleyennes.* Paris: Editions Klincksieck, 1969.

C. Kegan Paul. *William Godwin: His Friends and Contemporaries*. 2 vols.
London: Henry S. King & Co., 1876.

Percy Bysshe Shelley. *Alastor; or, The Spirit of Solitude and Other
Poems.* London: Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy; and Carpenter and Son, 1816.

Percy B. Shelley. *The Cenci. A Tragedy, in Five Acts.* Italy: Printed
for C. and J. Ollier, London, 1819.

*The Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley.* Ed. Frederick L. Jones. 2 vols.
Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1964.

*The Poems of Shelley.* 1 vol. to date: I, ed. Geoffrey Matthews and
Kelvin Everest. London: Longman, 1989-.

*The Prose Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley*, Volume I. Ed. E. B. Murray.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.

*The Complete Poetical Works of Percy Bysshe Shelley*, Volume II. Ed.
Neville Rogers. Oxford: At the Clarendon Press, 1975.

*The Works of Thomas Love Peacock.* Ed. H. F. B. Brett-Smith and C. E.
Jones. 10 vols. (The Halliford Edition.) London: Constable & Co. Ltd.,
1924-1934.

Walter Edwin Peck. "Shelley's Reviews Written for the
*Examiner*,"*Modern Language Notes* 39 (1924): 118-119.

*The Diary of Dr. John William Polidori, 1816, Relating to Byron,
Shelley, etc.* Ed. William Michael Rossetti. London: Elkin Matthews,
1911.

The Vampyre *and* Ernestus Berchtold; or, The Modern Oedipus*:*
*Collected Fiction of John William Polidori.* Ed. D. L. Macdonald and
Kathleen Scherf. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1994.

J[ohn]. H[amilton]. Reynolds. *Safie. An Eastern Tale.* London: James
Cawthorn and John Martin, 1814.

*Diary, Reminiscences, and Correspondence of Henry Crabb Robinson,
Barrister-at-Law, F.S.A.*, ed. Thomas Sadler. 2 vols. in 1. New York:
Hurd and Houghton, 1877.

Charles E. Robinson. "Percy Bysshe Shelley, Charles Oilier, and William
Blackwood: the contexts of early nineteenth-century publishing," in
*Shelley Revalued: Essays from the Gregynog Conference*, ed. Kelvin
Everest (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1983), pages 183-226.


