*xxiv*The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

*Romantics Reviewed*

St. Clair, *Godwins*

*& Shelleys*

St. Clair, "Shelley"\
*SC*\
\
*Shelley and Mary* Smith

Stillinger

Sunstein\
\
\
\
*Tinker Library*

Todd

Tokoo

Viets

*The Romantics Reviewed: Contemporary Reviews of British Romantic
Writers (Part C: Shelley, Keats, and London Radical Writers).* Ed.
Donald H. Reiman. 2 vols. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1972.
[Reiman prints photofacsimiles of the original reviews of *Frankenstein*
in *La Belle Assemblée*,*Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine*,*Edinburgh
Magazine*,*Knight's Quarterly Magazine*, and *Quarterly Review*.]

William St Clair. *The Godwins and the Shelleys: The biography of a
family.* New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1989. [Reprinted in paper,
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991.]

William St Clair. "Shelley unlocked," [London] *Times*, 7 March 1981,
page 8.

*Shelley and his Circle 1773-1822.* 8 vols. to date: I-IV, ed. Kenneth
Neill Cameron; V-VI, ed. Donald H. Reiman; VII-VIII, ed. Donald H.
Reiman and Doucet Devin Fischer. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1961-.

*Shelley and Mary.* 4 vols. Privately Printed [London, 1882].

Johanna M. Smith. Page proofs of "'Hideous Progenies': Texts of
*Frankenstein*," in *Texts and Textuality: Textual Instability, Theory,
and Interpretation* (Wellesley Studies in Critical Theory, Literary
History and Culture, Volume 13), ed. Philip Cohen (New York: Garland
Publishing, Inc., November, 1996), pages 123-142.

Jack Stillinger. *Multiple Authorship and the Myth of Solitary Genius.*
New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.

Emily W. Sunstein. *Mary Shelley: Romance and Reality.* Boston: Little,
Brown and Company, 1989. [Reprinted in paper, Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1991, with corrections to "Appendix B: Mary
Shelley's Works" (pages 409-415).]

Robert F. Metzdorf, compiler. *The Tinker Library: A Bibliographical
Catalogue of the Books and Manuscripts collected by Chauncey Brewster
Tinker.* New Haven: The Yale University Library, 1959.

William B. Todd, compiler. *A Directory of Printers and Others in Allied
Trades, London and Vicinity, 1800-1840.* London: Printing Historical
Society, 1972.

*Drafts for* Laon and Cythna*:* *Facsimiles of Bodleian MSS. Shelley
adds. e. 14 and adds. e. 19.* Ed. Tatsuo Tokoo. (The Bodleian Shelley
Manuscripts, Volume XIII.) New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1992.

Henry R. Viets, M.D. "The London Editions of Polidori's *The
Vampyre*,"*Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America* 63 (1969):
83-103.


