*Introduction*

Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (1797-1851) was born Mary Wollstonecraft
Godwin on 30 August 1797 in London; she was the daughter of two famous
writers, William Godwin (1756-1836) and Mary Wollstonecraft (1759-1797),
who died eleven days after her daughter Mary was born; she eloped with
the married twenty-one-year-old poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822) in
July 1814, when she was sixteen (they were accompanied by Mary Shelley's
slightly younger step-sister Claire Clairmont [1798-1879]^1^ on a
six-weeks' tour of France, Switzerland, Germany, and Holland); she gave
birth to a premature daughter in February 1815 (who died twelve days
later) and a son in January 1816. Less than four months later, the
unmarried Mary Godwin together with Percy Bysshe Shelley, their
three-months-old son William, and Claire Clairmont (unmarried but
pregnant with the child of Lord Byron [1788 -1824], who had recently
separated from his wife) journeyed to Geneva, Switzerland, where they
joined Byron and his doctor John William Polidori (1795-1821) for that
famous summer of 1816, a summer that has since been celebrated by these
writers' own recollections, by biographies, by fiction, and by film.

Among the many works conceived and/or written during that wet and stormy
summer^2^ were Byron's *Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: Canto the Third*,
his drama *Manfred*, and his Vampire "Fragment"; Percy Bysshe Shelley's
poems "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" and "Mont Blanc"; Polidori's tale
*The Vampyre* and his novel *Ernestus Berchtold; or, The Modern Oedipus*
(both published in 1819); and Mary Shelley's *Frankenstein; or, The
Modern Prometheus.* She began that novel as Mary Godwin in June 1816
when she was eighteen years old, she finished it as Mary Shelley in
April/May 1817 when she was nineteen (she had married Percy Bysshe
Shelley on 30 December 1816 after his first wife committed suicide), and
she published it anonymously on 1 January 1818 when she was twenty. Now,
exactly 180 years after she began writing *Frankenstein*, the
publication of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks will provide a unique
opportunity to study the creative process that went into the making of
Mary Shelley's monster.

Many of those who have previously studied *Frankenstein* will know that
there are a number of "texts" of the novel, each with significant
textual flaws: the three-volume *1818* first edition,^3^ with its
printing errors; the "Thomas" copy of *1818*, with Mary Shelley's own
holograph corrections and additions; the two-volume *1823* second
edition (which used *1818* as setting copy), with at least 120 variant
words occasioned by William Godwin, who had arranged publication of this
edition while Mary Shelley (widowed since Percy's death on 8 July 1822)
was still in Italy; and the one-volume *1831* revised edition (which
used *1823* as setting copy), with its many changes that Mary Shelley
herself introduced into the text. I say Mary Shelley herself and will
from this point denominate her as MWS (as she herself did) thereby
providing a shorthand to distinguish MWS from her husband PBS, who also
had a considerable "hand" in the earlier *1818* text.

This edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks will introduce yet more
"texts" of the novel, not all of which are extant: the now lost original
1816 ur-text or "story" that MWS wrote in the summer of 1816; the
two-volume *1816-1*7 "book" or manuscript Draft that MWS wrote for
approximately nine months from *c.* August 1816 through 17 April 1817,
during which time PBS made and suggested alterations to the manuscript;
and the three-volume *1817* manuscript Fair Copy (transcribed directly
from the Draft) that MWS (with some

xxv


