*xxvi*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooksassistance from PBS) prepared between 18
April and 13 May 1817 for the printers; the now lost proofs for *1818*
that were set from the Fair Copy; and the now lost revises (that is,
corrected proofs) for*1818.* The extant texts reproduced here in The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks are the surviving manuscripts of the *1816-17*
Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy, manuscripts owned by Lord Abinger and
now on deposit at the Bodleian Library, Oxford University.

The Draft was originally written in two large (hard-cover) notebooks,
here denominated Notebooks A and B, now disbound and consisting of a
total of 152 leaves (with text on 301 pages) that, together with three
insert leaves and two insert slips (with text on a total of 8 pages),
account for approximately 87% of the *1818* text (missing are the leaves
for Walton's four introductory Letters; for the beginning of Draft: Vol.
I, Ch. [1]; for the end of Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3; and for all of Draft:
Vol. II, Ch. [4]). The Fair Copy was originally written in [?eleven]
smaller (soft-cover) notebooks, the only surviving ones here denominated
Notebooks C1 and C2. These two notebooks are now disbound: 19 leaves are
missing; the 29 surviving leaves (with text on 58 pages), together with
1 insert leaf (with text on 1 page) as well as 1 substitute leaf (with
repeated text on 2 pages), contain approximately 12% of the received
*1818* text.

In an attempt to simplify the complicated sequence of these texts, I
offer the following outline.

The Texts of *Frankenstein*

(For more information on each of these texts [including the dating
thereof], consult the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below. See also
"Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text" and "Hypothetically
Reconstructing the Fair Copy" below. The texts identified by bold
typeface below are printed in full in this edition, and quotations from
other texts [*1818 Thomas*,*1823*, and *1831*] are to be found in the
footnotes.)

Ur-text: Draft(s) of a "story" ([?17] June-[August or September]
1816)—not extant^4^

***↓******1816-17 Draft***: 2-volume novel in two hard-cover notebooks
([August or September] 1816-17 April

1817)—most of **Notebooks A and B** survive

***↓******1817* Fair Copy**: 3-volume novel in [?eleven] soft-cover
notebooks (18 April-13 May 1817)—parts of

**Notebooks C1 and C2** survive

***↓*** Proofs ([?23] September-[?3] November 1817)—not extant

***↓***

Revises ([?23] September-[?20] November 1817)—not extant

***↓***

***1818***: 1st Edition in 3 vols. (1 January 1818)—published by
Lackington et al. in 500 copies

***↓***

***↓****1818 Thomas:* "Thomas" copy of 1st Edition (corrected by MWS
before July 1823)—survives at ***↓***Pierpont Morgan Library

***↓***

*1823*: 2d Edition in 2 vols. (11 August 1823)—published by G. and W. B.
Whittaker (but not set from

*1818 Thomas*)

***↓***

***↓*** [*1826*]: [?Re-issued 2d Edition] (4 April 1826)—apparently
issued by Henry Colburn

***↓***

*1831*: Revised Edition in 1 vol. (31 October 1831)—published by Henry
Colburn and Richard Bentley

in 4020 copies

A listing of all the variants (both accidental and substantive) that
exist among these extant texts is beyond the scope of this (and,
possibly, any) codex edition, and no editor has ever collated all the
accidental variants of punctuation, capitalization, and spelling between
any two editions. However, nearly complete collations of the substantive
or word variants between*1818* and *1831* have been published: see the
collations in *1818 Rieger* (pages 230-259 [and page 288]) and in *1818*
Macdonald (pages 317-359)—Rieger but not Macdonald


