Introduction *xxvii*

incorporated the readings from *1818 Thomas* in his text; for a shorter
collation that is prefaced by a useful summary of the type of changes
involved, see *1818 Butler* (pages 199-228); and, for the most
comprehensive collation, one that incorporates the autograph corrections
in *1818 Thomas* and that also includes substantive variants in *1823*
as well as *1831*, see *1818 Crook* (pages 182-227).^5^ In this edition,
I offer for the first time the parallel texts by which the extant parts
of both the *1816-1*7 Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy can be collated
with the *1818* text, and Appendices A and B provide a means for other
collations (Draft with extant Fair Copy; and PBS Fair Copy with MWS
re-transcription of the Fair Copy).

It should be stressed that these collations and parallel texts are
valuable tools by which a reader can and should learn that a text or
literary "product" involves a literary "process" that must be understood
before any attempt is made to "fix" a text, whether "fix" is understood
to mean "establish" or "make firm and unchanging" or "emend and
therefore change." In the case of *Frankenstein*, the substantive
changes that MWS made in her revised edition are so extensive that many
teachers and students of *Frankenstein* consider *1818* and *1831* as
two different novels. Among the significant "alterations" made in *1831*
are the following: a transformation of Elizabeth from a cousin to a
foundling having no blood relation to Victor; a new chapter to
accommodate a much longer exposition about Victor's childhood; and a
more explicit and earlier introduction of the doppelgänger theme when
Victor alludes to Aristophanes' myth of the circular and then divided
primal human beings in Plato's *Symposium*.^6^ The already published
collations between *1818* and *1831* provide an opportunity for any
reader of *Frankenstein* to experience the creative process by which MWS
transformed an already published edition into another text, and this
edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks extends that opportunity
backwards: it publishes for the first time the extant portions of the
*1816-17* Draft and the *1817* Fair Copy (both printed parallel to
*1818*) so that the reader can "see" the transformations of one text
into another and, at the same time, "see" the degree of PBS's
involvement in these transformations.

In addition to collations and parallel texts, there have been other
studies that have addressed the texts of *Frankenstein* by way of the
manuscripts, but each of these has been flawed, in one way or another,
because the full texts of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks, here published
for the first time, were not available to benefit the earlier studies.
As this edition will make evident, much of the criticism to date on
*Frankenstein* will have to be re-evaluated in light of the
collaboration between MWS and PBS, a collaboration that can now be
"seen" in this edition by way of the different fonts used to distinguish
the Shelleys' often similar manuscript hands. Those who have previously
attempted to make those distinctions include James Rieger, E. B. Murray,
Ann Mellor, Marie Hélène Huet, and David Ketterer, each of whose
contributions will be briefly addressed below in "MWS and PBS's
Collaboration in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks." Because so many critics
of the novel have made factual errors (repeating, e.g., that
*Frankenstein* was published in March 1818 rather than its actual
publication date of 1 January 1818), I also refer the reader to the
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for a record of the facts about the
novel as they can best be determined. Some readers may prefer to go
immediately to that Chronology in preparation for reading The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks.

***Using This Edition of The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

This edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks partakes of the
characteristics of a diplomatic edition, that is, one that "doubles" or
reproduces another text (whether printed or manuscript) with a fidelity
that respects the original's spelling, punctuation, lineation, and other
particulars so that the reader can re-experience, albeit in a different
representational form, the original text. More precisely stated,
however, this edition is made up of three separate editions: (1) a
*photofacsimile* of the manuscript; (2) a *type facsimile* that
replicates the manuscript (page by page, line by line, word by word);
and (3) a "*diplomatic*"*or literal transcript* of the *1818* first
edition that is printed in tandem with the type facsimile of the
manuscript, providing the reader parallel texts by which the creative
process may be studied. This combination of three editions^7^ was made
possible by three fortuitous circumstances: a Garland policy (worked out
in collaboration with Donald H. Reiman and the Bodleian Library) to
reproduce in photofacsimile all extant manuscript pages, each of which
would be faced by a type facsimile; a set of *Frankenstein* manuscripts
in which MWS managed to write fewer than ten words in each line; and a
pre-determined Garland 9x12 inch format that could accommodate the
manuscript


