Introduction *xxix*

*1818* first edition (Volume and Chapter numbers may be found at the top
of each transcription page) as well as by the two-part division of this
edition of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks (revealed in part by the
italicized pages *266* and *268* in the above illustration), demand the
following diagram, arranged in chronological order:

Notebooks A B C1 C2

MWS Draft I II

*1818* I II III

Bod. Dep. c. 477/1 c. 534/1 c. 534/2----------------

*1816-17 Rob.* Part One Part
Two---------------------------------------------------

**Bodleian Foliation:** Although all leaves of The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks are now foliated in pencil at the top right of each recto (and
are cited as reference points in the headers, textual commentary, and
Quiring Charts), the photofacsimiles of the manuscript leaves
(photographed in 1993) reproduce the Bodleian folio numbers only in Dep.
c. 477/1 (deposited in 1974 and then foliated by Margaret Crum); Dep. c.
534/1-2, although deposited in 1976, was not foliated until 31 January
1995, when, after a discussion about a suitable ordering of the leaves,
Bruce Barker-Benfield penciled the folio numbers onto each recto. The
Library's purpose in adding such foliation was not to dictate an order
of leaves (the presence of insertions allows for several alternatives)
but to enable a neutral mode of citation for each surviving piece of
paper.

**Notes:** Notes that address the physical conditions of a manuscript
page are positioned with all other textual notes at the bottom of each
transcription page.

**Transcription Pages (rectos)**

The recto pages contain not only the type facsimile of the manuscript
text but also (line by line) a literal transcript of the *1818* text as
well as a textual apparatus in the form of footnotes.

**Type Facsimile of the Manuscript:** This type facsimile of the
manuscript text was initially prepared from the high-resolution
black-and-white photographs, then checked twice (for a period of 4 weeks
in January/February 1995 and then for another week in September 1995)
against the original manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, and then read
aloud against the photographs in an attempt to represent accurately the
text of the original. The text of the type facsimile was formatted by
WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS, using "Tables" to create 2 or 3 columns and
using "Styles" to create different fonts by which to distinguish MWS's
hand from that of PBS and to represent other peculiarities of the
manuscript (for example, smear deletions and Bodleian foliation). At a
glance, the reader should be able to determine just what words and
suggestions PBS introduced into MWS's novel. These different fonts and
other conventions used in the type facsimile are as follows:

**Cancel Lines:** There are three means by which cancelations are
represented. Individual letters or words or phrases that then MWS and/or
PBS canceled by horizontal lines are represented by the strikeover
feature: e.g., word or word (in the latter case, the manuscript cancel
line did not pass through all of the letters of the word).^8^ Although I
did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS from PBS horizontal
cancel lines, the surrounding words in most instances should make
possible the identification of who canceled what words: e.g., PBS
replacement words would indicate that he had just canceled the words to
be replaced. Footnotes are occasionally used to identify whether a
letter or word or phrase was canceled by either MWS or PBS.

Longer cancelations are much easier to distinguish. Ink and other
evidence prove that MWS always canceled with long vertical straight
lines (represented by a graphics line feature in WordPerfect), whereas
PBS always canceled longer sections of the manuscript with wavy lines
(represented by wavy ink lines that have been drawn on the transcript
page in an attempt to replicate the original manuscript.)^9^

**Carets:** Although I did not graphically attempt to distinguish MWS
from PBS carets, the hand used for the


