*xxx*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

marginal or interlinear insertion in all (or most) instances would be
the hand that entered the caret. MWS used the caret more often than PBS
to signal an insertion: PBS would frequently write above a canceled word
without employing a caret, but in some of these cases MWS may have later
supplied a caret. For purposes of lineation in the type facsimile, the
caret (positioned in order to replicate the manuscript) is considered a
part of the line below which it appears.

**Conjectural Readings:** Curly brackets enclose words or letters in the
manuscript that are conjectural or indecipherable: e.g., {?word} or {?}.
Angle brackets enclose words or letters that have been cut or torn from
the manuscript but may be conjectured or otherwise deduced: e.g.,
\<?word\> or \<word\>.

**Fonts:** I have employed the following fonts in this type facsimile of
the manuscript:

10-point CG Times for MWS text (8.5-point CG Times for MWS interlinear
text)

*10-point Garamond Halbfett Kursiv for PBS text**(**8.5-point Garamond
Halbfett Kursiv for interlinear PBS text*)^10^*^^*

outline for smear deletions in either MWS text or *PBS text* (see, e.g.,
transcription pages 233 and 455) Courier-WP (Type 1) for all other hands
(e.g., compositors or Bodleian staff)

Although there are many similarities between MWS's and PBS's hands,
there are enough differences (especially in their formation of the
letters "d," "f," "r," "w,"^11^ and "x") to make me confident that in
almost all cases I have properly distinguished their hands. Usually, the
very slant of an extended marginal passage or of an interlinear
correction made it fairly easy to identify the two hands. But in those
cases where I had to conjecture about a letter or a word or two that did
not have very distinguishing letters, I would consult with Bruce
Barker-Benfield in order to determine which hand was the more likely,
represent the word in the transcription by means of that font, and then
footnote the conjecture: e.g., a 60/40 % likelihood that the "she" on
pages 182-183 (line 12) in this edition was MWS's meant that I employed
the MWS interlinear font and that the footnote for line 12 read "*?MWS*
she." In those cases where neither ink nor other evidence would make one
hand more likely than the other, the default was always to print the
word as MWS's and to footnote the representation as conjectural.

**Incompletely Formed Terminal Letters:** In cases where MWS (or PBS)
trailed off and did not quite finish the last letter of a word that was
purposely left incomplete or canceled, I have taken the liberty to
conjecture and print that letter as if it were completely formed in the
manuscript (see, e.g., pages 72-73 in this edition, line 31, where there
is enough of an incomplete "u" in the canceled word in manuscript to
warrant my transcription of "recou recourse"—in this case, MWS
apparently trailed off because she was unsatisfied by the slightly
misformed "re" in her first attempt).

**Ink/Pencil:** All of the manuscript pages were written in ink, and
each of the few places where MWS, PBS, or an unidentified hand used
pencil is indicated in the footnotes. Sometimes MWS would trace over in
pen PBS's penciled words (see, e.g., pages 62-65,292-293 in this
edition). It was probably MWS who penciled the ruled margin in Notebook
A (see "Rules," below), and the Bodleian foliation was done in pencil.

**Line Numbers:** Bracketed line numbers [set in 8-point CG Times]
respect all lines and interlineations except for below-the-line carets.

**Other Conventions:** I have attempted to reproduce the peculiarities
of the manuscript as far as WordPerfect would allow—see, e.g., page 335
for writing up a slope (using the "Advance" command) and page 601 for
writing vertically down a page (using Graphic Boxes).

**Overlaying Letters and Words:** In an attempt to make this type
facsimile an easily read text, I have not employed the convention of
arrows or carets in the transcription to indicate that one letter or
word overlays another. Rather, I have printed the overlaying letters or
words in the facsimile and relegated to the footnotes the letters and
words underneath that were replaced. (The presence of the manuscript
photofacsimile as a gloss and a check makes such a convention possible.)
Thus the reader will frequently


