Introduction *xxxi*

encounter in the footnotes entries like "18]*PBS* ing *overlays MWS* ed
*in* entreating" meaning that "entreating" is the word printed on line
18 in the type facsimile and that the manuscript photofacsimile should
reveal that MWS had first written "entreated" and that PBS later wrote
"*ing*" over MWS's "ed" (see transcription page 111, line 18, in this
edition for this example).

**Rules:** There are up to three rules on a transcription page. The
*single horizontal rule* is used to separate the footnotes from the type
facsimile and the literal transcript above. The *double vertical rule*
is used to separate the type facsimile from the literal transcript of
*1818.* The *single vertical rule* represents the penciled rule that MWS
made in Notebook A to create a left margin in which she and PBS could
emend the text. I have attempted to represent the position of the words
next to this rule as accurately as possible: I have right justified all
of the words to the left of that rule (except for the last line of a
passage if it is some distance from the rule [see, e.g., transcription
page 11, lines 19-41 in the margin, the "her own." in line 41 not right
justified]); and, where warranted and possible, I have represented words
that cross the marginal rule (see, e.g., transcription page 97, line 30
in the margin).

**Shadowing of Page:** Any partially shadowed transcription page
indicates that the page is repeated elsewhere (with different shadowing)
to accommodate and explain an insertion in the manuscript notebook: the
reader is advised to follow the narrative through the unshadowed
sections of these pages and to read about the circumstances of the
insertion in the shadowed sections (the first instances of this
repetition on pages 14-37 in this edition are somewhat complicated,
involving more than one insertion at a time; the reader is therefore
advised initially to consult simpler forms of this repetition, e.g., on
pages 416-421 in this edition).

**Literal Transcript of *1818*:** The text of *1818 is* based on (and
was read aloud against) the copy in the University of Delaware Library,
and where there were printing errors it was checked against other
copies; in one place, the word "Then" and an adjacent comma, both of
which had dropped from the Delaware and some other copies of *1818*,
were restored to the text (see transcription page 283 in this edition).
In all, I have consulted fourteen additional copies of the *1818* first
edition: four copies at the Pierpont Morgan Library (one of which is
*1818 Thomas*), three copies at The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of
Shelley and His Circle at The New York Public Library, and one copy each
at the Bodleian Library (Oxford University), All Souls College (Oxford
University), Cambridge University Library, the Library of Congress, the
Newberry Library, the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale
University, and the library of one private collector.^12^ A selective
comparison of printing errors in all fifteen copies suggests that there
was only one stop-press correction in the 500 printed copies of the
first edition (affecting only a page number), and that may have occurred
very early in the pulling of revises (see line 21 and note on
transcription page 257 in this edition). There are, however, some
differences among the copies of *1818* as a result of the formes having
loosened or type having been broken during the printing process (see
"Emendations to and Anomalies in the *1818* Text" below). All such
variations as well as all printing errors and misspellings (but not
variant spellings) are pointed out in the textual notes, thereby
enabling me to produce an unemended literal transcript of *1818*, one
that duplicates the first edition (in its hypothetically reconstructed
complete state) as much as possible, although filtered through the
following conventions:

**8.5-point CG Times:** The base font of 8.5-point CG Times is used to
represent the text, but I also attempt to image print variations in
*1818* by using such things as initial display type (e.g., Word) for the
first word in each Chapterâ€”as well as large and small Caps and even an
8-point font for portions of the letters Walton and others exchanged in
the narrative.

**Lineation:** The *1818* text parallels the manuscript text, line by
line, as much as space allows. When a manuscript word occupies the end
of one line and the beginning of another, the *1818* word is represented
on the first of these lines; when there are extensive revisions between
*1816-17* Draft and *1818* (whether evident in extant *1817* Fair Copy
or deducible as having taken place in now missing fair copy, proofs,
and/or revises), the *1818* text will have fewer or more words occupying
the available lines than is the case for


