*xxxii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

the *1816-17* Draft text. A quick visual comparison of these parallel
texts will show the places of major alteration between the Draft and
*1818*: see especially pages 449 and 459 in this edition for places
where MWS and/or PBS made extensive changes late in the proof stage; see
also the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 20 October, for [22] October,
and for 28 October 1817.

Where no manuscript is extant, the *1818* text is still reproduced
diplomatically but without reference to any manuscript. By including
these portions of *1818*, the reader can both "see" the proportion of
text missing from manuscript and have at hand a complete *1818* text to
compare with other texts.

**Page Numbers:** The page numbers in *1818* are in bold, bracketed and
placed in the literal transcript to show the **[number:]**beginning of a
page, even if the page breaks over a hyphenated word (see, e.g.,
transcription page 17 in this edition).

**Dagger:** A † follows any word, number, or punctuation mark in the
literal transcript of *1818* that is glossed in the footnotes, the note
being preceded by "**1818 text:line number**]".

**Paragraph Symbol:** A *¶* is added in the transcript of *1818* to make
more evident the beginning of each paragraph (excepting the first
paragraph in each chapter that is signaled by a display word).

**Double Quotation Marks:** The ordinary double quotation marks in CG
Times (" ") are altered in the literal transcript to curved quotation
marks (“ ”) in an attempt to replicate those in *1818.*

**Headers:** The headers for each page locate the reader in the
manuscript text (whether *1816-17* Draft or *1817* Fair Copy) and in the
*1818* text. More important, the headers enable the reader to witness
the restructuring of a two-volume novel in Draft (through a three-volume
novel in Fair Copy, most of which has to be extrapolated from the other
evidence) into a three-volume first edition in *1818.* In the act of
fair copying her text, MWS actually changed the beginning and endings of
many chapters as she restructured her novel. That restructuring is made
evident in the headers for each transcription page: see, for example,
transcription page 69 where the beginning of **Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 5,
page 61** has become the beginning of **1818: Vol. I, Ch. III, pages
78-79**; or transcription page 473 where **Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 12, page
118** has been divided into **1818: Volume III, Chs. II-III, pages
38-40**. In this latter example, MWS's manuscript note to herself to
"Finish Chap. 2 here" directly shows how she restructured the two-volume
Draft into the three-volume Fair Copy. The reader should also note how
nearly identical the pagination is between the three-volume Fair Copy
and the three-volume *1818:* see, e.g., the header on transcription page
749 in this edition: **Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. VII, page 175 [=] 1818:
Vol. III, Ch. VII, pages 176-178**.

**Notes:** The format and the extent of the notes are in part determined
by the limitation of space, but footnotes rather than endnotes are used
in order to make all relevant information available on facing pages of
this edition. I have attempted to serve simultaneously, as much as
possible, the principles of clarity, economy, and consistency. The
different fonts used for MWS and PBS in the type facsimile of the
manuscript mean that I did not have to footnote each place PBS wrote in
the manuscript, but I do identify as PBS's any of his words or passages
that are discussed in the notes (e.g., "*PBS* ing *overlays MWS* ed *in*
examining").

**MWS and PBS in Notes**: Unless identified as PBS's (or someone
else's), all words or marks discussed in the footnotes are MWS's. Words
conjecturally printed as MWS's in the type facsimile are footnoted with
"?MWS"; those conjecturally printed as PBS's are footnoted with "?PBS."

**Order of Notes:** Each note, preceded by location (whether page
position or line number) and a closing bracket (both set in bold) is
arranged in the following order: **preceding page(s)]; entire page];
left edge]; top of page]; right edge]; bottom of page];
margin:sequential line number(s) from type facsimile]; sequential line
number(s) from type facsimile]; 1818 text: sequential line number(s)
from type facsimile]; following page(s)]**.


