Introduction *xxxiii*

**Phrasing and Types of Notes:** Space dictated that notes be written in
the most economical form, where possible in a phrase rather than a
clause or a sentence. Distinctions are made between *top* and *upper*
(the former higher on the page), between *bottom* and *lower* (the
former lower on the page), between *above* and *below* (referring to
vertical positions on the page) and *over* and *under* (referring to
words, letters, or marks that overlay or underlay others), between
*miswritten* and *misformed* (the former usually referring to a
misspelled word; the latter, to a misshaped letter), between
*bleed-through* and *show-through* ink marks (both visible in the
photofacsimiles, but the latter visible without the ink having bled
through to the other side of the paper), and between *wet-offset* and
*dry-offset* ink marks (the former evidencing an ink mark resulting from
the closing of a still-wet inked page against another page; the latter,
from a chemical process that sometimes causes dry ink from one leaf to
"yellow" a facing leaf in a closed notebook). Economy has dictated such
non-parallel phrasings as "*misspelled* word" and "*variant spelling*
word" (in both cases "word" is the word as it appears in the manuscript,
and "variant spelling" covers a multitude of spellings that are
sanctioned in one form or another by the *OED*); the combined short and
long "s" has been termed the "*ligatured* ss". Among the other types of
notes are those addressing the condition of the paper (including such
matters as soiling, discoloration, torn edges, holes, glue residue), the
appearance of various marks (e.g., insert marks, carets, cancel lines),
and the formation of certain letters or words (e.g., uncrossed t's,
crossed l's, one letter or word overlaying another, and some initial
letters like "o" that could be either capital or lower case). For the
kinds of notes on the *1818* text, see "Emendations to and Anomalies in
the *1818* Text" below.

**Typeface of Notes:** *Location and bracket are in bold*; MWS as well
as PBS manuscript words are printed in roman; *and textual commentary is
in italic.* These conventions mean that the notes do not employ the font
distinctions between a PBS word and an MWS word that were used in the
type facsimile of the manuscript. Thus a word represented in the type
facsimile as "allow*ed*" (indicating that PBS had added "ed" to MWS's
"allow") would be described in the notes as "*PBS* ed *added******in*
allowed" (see also "MWS and PBS in Notes" above). The notes are in
8-point CG Times, and small caps are used for "mws" and "pbs."

**Garland Page Numbers:** Garland page numbers in this edition are in
italics, are positioned at the top left of a verso and the top right of
a recto, and are used as a means of reference (e.g., "see transcription
page 000 in this edition" or "see pages 000-000 in this edition").

**Appendix A**

Appendix A prints in parallel form the texts of the *1816-17* Draft and
of the extant *1817* Fair Copy, thereby showing how MWS refined her text
in April/May 1817 as she prepared it for the publisher and the press.
Because PBS undertook part of the fair copying (see pages 748-773 in
this edition), these parallel texts in Appendix A provide the reader an
opportunity to contrast the ways that MWS (see pages 780-810) and PBS
(see pages 810-817) altered the Draft while transcribing the Fair Copy.

**Appendix B**

Appendix B prints in parallel form the texts of a portion of the PBS
Fair Copy and the extant MWS re- transcription of that portion, a
re-transcription occasioned by one or both of two factors: a discovery
that some of the PBS Fair-Copy text had been damaged when the pages were
cut from the notebook; and/or a possible reluctance to submit to any
publisher (but especially to PBS's publisher Charles Ollier) the Fair
Copy with parts^13^ in PBS's distinctive hand, potentially revealing the
identity of the anonymous author and "friend" whom PBS represented to
the publishers.


