*xxxiv* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**Appendix C**

Appendix C reproduces the four photofacsimiles of MWS's Cyrus Fragment
that accompanied the *Frankenstein* manuscripts when they were deposited
in the Bodleian Library in 1974 and in 1976. These two leaves, which are
foliated in Dep. c. 477/1 (folio 63) and 534/1 (folio 95), may have been
linked to the *Frankenstein* manuscripts long before they came to the
Bodleian.

***Emendations to and Anomalies in the* 1818 *Text***

Incorporating the literal transcript *of 1818* into this edition has
raised new questions about The *Frankenstein* Notebooks and their
relations to the first edition. In answering some of these questions, I
decided not to emend *1818* and instead to print a hypothetically
reconstructed and uncorrected *1818* that would serve and be served by
the Draft and Fair Copy. Seeing these texts in parallel columns enables
the reader to understand part of the process by which the manuscript was
transformed into a book and to discover possible printing errors, even
though most of the Fair Copy that was used as printer's copy is now
missing. For example, seeing the word "lurid" in the Draft
photofacsimile and type facsimile and the word "livid" in *1818* (see
pages 98-99 in this edition) leads to a strong suspicion that either MWS
in the now missing Fair Copy or the compositor in the now missing proof
mistakenly transformed the Draft "lurid" into the printed "livid." Of
course, I have the luxury in this edition of merely suggesting rather
than the more difficult task of making such emendations, but the reader
should be able to determine most of those that I am making in a new
edition of *Frankenstein.* In all, there are nearly 100 places (each
signaled by a dagger in the *1818* column of this edition) where the
text needs emending because of misprintings (e.g., "Willia mhad"),
misspellings (e.g., "guished"), mispunctuations (e.g., missing quotation
marks or periods that should be question marks), broken or missing type
(e.g., the "Then" and comma that are missing from many copies of
*1818*), or MWS errors in her Draft and Fair Copy (e.g., the name
"Gower" rather than "Goring"). (For these particular printing and/or
textual errors, see pages 49, 107, 157, 203, 283, and 459 in this
edition.)

The dagger is also used in a number of other places in the *1818* text
in order to signal and address (1) each of the emendations (six of which
I dispute) that Ketterer has suggested in his article "Readings" and (2)
the fourteen places where *1818 Wolf-1* misrepresents the *1818* text
and/or introduces new errors into the text. For the relevant pages in
this edition, see the entries in my list of "Short Titles" for *1818
Wolf-1* and for Ketterer "Readings." I supply these specifics about
*1818 Wolf-1* in order to prevent that not-so-faithful photofacsimile
from being the source of future errors.^14^

***The Makeup of The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

*(Quiring Charts and technical descriptions below are based on a text
originally prepared by Dr. B. C. Barker-Benfield.)*

The remnants of the original *Frankenstein* Notebooks tell a fascinating
tale about the way that MWS created her novel. Part of this tale is
evident in the preceding advice on how to use this edition, and the
fullest expression of the narrative about these notebooks is to be found
in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" that concludes this Introduction.
Here, however, the technical details about the number and makeup of
these notebooks at least provide an outline to the creative process
involved in the making of *Frankenstein.* The technical details
concerning each of the four extant notebooks are presented separately
below, but it is worth mentioning here that all four of these notebooks
in which MWS drafted and then fair copied her novel in 1816-17 were
originally bound; that the bindings and the covers of all four notebooks
have long since disappeared; that the surviving manuscripts in the
Abinger papers are all loose leaves, all of which are "singletons"
(i.e., single leaves), with the exception of two bifolia that are still
joined; and that watermarks, torn edges, glue residue along some edges,
sewing holes, and wet offset ink blots provide sufficient evidence by
which to reconstruct the original makeup of the quires in each of these
notebooks. Moreover, the very nature of the


