Introduction *xxxv*

writing in these notebooks proves that MWS drafted and fair copied her
novel (and that PBS made his changes and suggested his alterations)
while the notebooks were still intact: each main group of now detached
leaves includes at least one reconstructed bifolium where the writing
overlaps across the two halves; the writing at what would have been the
inside edges of some versos displays a wavering and a trailing off,
indicating that the writer's hand was impeded by the gutter of the still
bound notebook; the writing at the outside edges of the rectos
frequently carries over to the outside edge(s) of what would have been
the notebook's next leaf (or leaves), a very natural effect when a large
volume is splayed open during the process of writing; now missing leaves
that were apparently discarded during the composition process have
sometimes left wet offset ink blots, suggesting that the leaves were
torn from a bound notebook; and different leaves from later quires or
from other sources were sometimes inserted into the main sequence of
pages in such a way (leaving the evidence of wet offset ink blots or pin
holes) to indicate that the main sequence of pages was bound in a
notebook. All of this evidence leads to the inescapable conclusion that
*Frankenstein* was drafted and fair copied in notebooks that were
purchased as ready-made, bound blankbooks from commercial stationers in
England or abroad. Further details about the size and source of the
notebooks, the type of covers, the number of pages in each quire, the
watermarks, and other particulars are provided separately for each
notebook below.

**Draft Notebook A**

(Dep. c. 477/1, folios 4-28a, 28b-62; Dep. c. 534/1, folios 1-17=Pages
10-15, 26-31, 36-339 in this edition) (With Dep. c. 477/1 insert folios
1-3 and Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 18=Pages 16-25, 32-35, 340-341 in
this edition)

**Paper, Watermarks, and Covers:** Notebook A survives as 77 leaves of
continental laid paper with a light-blue tint, with edges that were
commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 270-271 x 186-187 mm.,
yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 270-271 x 372-374 mm., and
a minimum whole-sheet size of 372-374 x 540-542 mm. The leaves were made
up into a quarto notebook, with each of the two watermarks split across
the reconstructed folds: from the "mould" side, the watermarks read D |
ADIVONNE; the countermark is a bell (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 1-2;
3-4). There are five sewing holes visible, with three main stations (for
cords?) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at the top and bottom. Glue
residue at the gutters on outside leaves of quires not only confirm the
quiring-structure of the notebook, but also indicate a substantial
professional binding with hard covers. The continental paper of the
notebook suggests that it was purchased abroad, probably in Geneva or
its environs. There are no other examples of this paper in the Bodleian
Shelley collections.

**Date of Notebook A:** ([August or September]-[?December] 1816): If MWS
purchased this notebook in Geneva, she possibly began drafting Walton's
introductory Letters into this notebook as early as August 1816; she
made her first insertion on or around 28 October 1816; she appears to
have finished drafting the part of her novel in Notebook A on or around
5 December 1816, after or while finishing a "very long" chapter on
Safie's arrival and her language instruction; and she may have revised
and drastically shortened this "very long" Ch. [4] as late as 10-17 or
even 29 April 1817 (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for all of these
dates), days when she (and probably PBS) made final corrections to the
Draft in Notebook A.

**Foliation and Pagination in Notebook A:** The Quiring Charts below
(prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in this notebook. MWS would
paginate her notebook as she went along,^15^ ordinarily at the top
outside corner of the page (top left on the verso; top right on the
recto). Errors that she corrected at once are not of any great
significance, but there are some significant alterations in pagination
that help us understand her process of composition, particularly as they
relate to the forty missing pages (twenty leaves or folios) at the
beginning of the notebook (a number of pages sufficient to have
contained the missing text—see the footnote on page 2 in this edition,
as well as the footnote on Quire I below. In this instance, there is a
strong possibility that MWS's page numbers "41" and "43" and "45" on the
first three surviving rectos are alterations from numbers "21" and "22"
and "23" respectively,


