*xxxvi* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

suggesting that she had foliated rather than paginated her notebook up
to this point but then decided to enumerate each page (verso page
numbers "42" and "44" and "46," as well as recto page number "47" that
begins a new chapter, show no sign of having been altered from
anything).^16^

Surviving leaves of the notebook break off abruptly at the 8th leaf in
the 12-leaf Quire IX (see Quiring Charts below)—at Dep. c. 534/1, folio
11 (pages 20/21)—a point in the midst of Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3. That
abruptness, together with the fact that pages 22-56 are not represented
at all in Draft and with the fact that insert/rewrite pages beginning at
page "57" are in the same paper as the rest of Notebook A, suggest that
there are 35 pages (taking up at least 18 leaves) missing at the end of
Notebook A.

There are three places in Notebook A where the numerical sequence is out
of order: MWS skipped page number "52" when she went from page "51" to
"53" (see folio 9 recto and verso); she seemed to have made up for the
error when she followed page "58" with another "58" (see folio 12 recto
and verso); and she repeated the chapter number "7" (see folios 21 recto
and 26 recto)—for all of these, see pages 48-51, 60-63, 96-97, and
116-117 in this edition.

**Ruling in Notebook A:** With the exception of the insert/rewrite pages
labeled "X" and "Y" (for which see below), all other extant pages of
Notebook A have a pencil rule (at varying distances from the left edge),
possibly made by MWS at one sitting, to create a left margin so that she
and PBS had room to revise the text.

**Insert Pages in Notebook A:** Two insertions into Notebook A, each
written on different paper, were foliated by the Bodleian staff at the
beginning and the end of the main sequence of notebook pages (Dep. c.
477/1, folios 1-3; Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18—see pages 16-25, 32-35, and
340-341 in this edition). Each of these insertions accommodates new text
added to text already drafted in Notebook A, and each was most likely
inserted loosely in place in the notebook. There is also another insert
section in Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 12-17) that was drafted on
pages taken from a (presumably) later quire in the notebook. Each of
these insertions was occasioned by a trauma in the text, and each
demands further description.

**First Insert Pages (Dep. c. 477/1, folios 1-3):** The first six-page
insertion was written on three unpaginated consecutive leaves that MWS
most likely used before she entered "Write Ch. 3½ [altered to 2½]" in
her Bath Journal on 27 October 1816 (for an explanation of the
circumstances of this insertion, see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
that date; see also pages 16-25 and 32-35 in this edition). The leaves
consist of one bifolium (folios 1-2, with the second leaf mutilated) and
one singleton (folio 3, a left half-sheet) of laid paper of cream color
(dirtied at the edges), with the bifolium sheet measuring 315-318 x
403-404 mm. From the "felt" side of the paper, the left half of the
watermarks reads "T W & B | BOTFIELD"; on the right half is Britannia
facing left, over the fancy letters "TW&BB" and the date "1815" in a
crowned triple oval (see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 5-6). The Bodleian
Shelley collections have two other certain examples of this same paper,
each with identical measurements and the pair of Botfield and 1815
Britannia watermarks.^17^ Another example of this Botfield paper
(watermarked "TW&BB | 1809" rather than "1815"), which was manufactured
by the Botfield brothers Thomas, William, and Beriah in the West
country—provides some evidence that this paper may have been acquired by
MWS in Bath,^18^ where she was residing at the time.

**Second Insert Pages (Dep. c. 534/1, folios 12-17—the "X" and "Y"
inserts**): This second insert was written on six leaves that MWS may
have used as late as April 1817 when she entered "Correct F." in her
Marlow Journal (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for 10-17 and for
29 April 1817). Because these six leaves of laid paper have the same
dimensions, light-blue tint, and watermark that are evidenced in
Notebook A and because they exhibit sufficient physical characteristics
(identical sewing holes; matching torn edges; pleats at the inner edges
of all six leaves, caused either directly by the sewing-thread or by
adjacent crumpling), they were most likely three bifolia taken from an
unused (the ?last) quire in Notebook A. The fact that two of these
reconstructed bifolia give evidence of writing across the inner join
leads to an hypothesis involving MWS moving back and forth between two
groups of pages here labeled "X"


