Introduction *xli*

**Draft Notebook B**

(Dep. c. 534/1, folios 19-37, 39-94=Pages 342-417, 420-643 in this
edition)

(With Dep. c. 534/1 insert folio 38=Pages 418-419 in this edition)

**Paper, Watermarks, and Covers:** Notebook B survives as 75 leaves of
British laid paper, thickish in weight, cream color, with edges that
were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 310-311 x 199-202 mm.,
yielding an estimated bifolium-sheet size of 310-311 x 398-404 mm.
Technically, the notebook was made up into folio format, with watermarks
in the center of each half-sheet. From the "felt" side of the paper, the
left half of the sheet has watermarks reading "JL | 1806 "; on the right
half is Britannia, facing left, in a crowned triple oval (see
Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 7-8). There are eight sewing holes visible in
the single intact bifolium (folios 41-42—see pages 430-435 in this
edition), three pairs at three main stations (presumably for broad
tapes) plus holes for the kettle-stitches at top and bottom. Glue
residue at the gutters on the outside leaves of quires help to confirm
the collation structure and suggest a substantial binding with hard
covers. When squared up together, the edges of the leaves show traces of
blue and red marbling that once decorated all three outside edges of the
closed notebook. There are no other examples of this paper in the
Bodleian Shelley collections, but a fragment of PBS's "Speculations on
Morals and Metaphysics" (see Pforzheimer SC 339) seems to be on
identical paper.^20^

**Date of Notebook B:** ([?December] 1816-April 1817): If MWS exhausted
all or most of the paper in Notebook A on or around 5 December 1816 (see
"Date of Notebook A" above), then she probably began Notebook B as early
as 6 December 1816. She finished drafting her novel in Notebook B by
April 1817, and she (and probably PBS) made final corrections in Draft
Notebook B on 10-17 April and, possibly, on 29 April 1817 (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for all these dates; also see
transcription page 419 in this edition for the postmark of 9 April 1817
on the slip of paper on which MWS made one of her last revisions).

**Foliation and Pagination in Notebook B:** The Quiring Charts below
(prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook (the reader is
reminded that there are no Bodleian foliation numbers in the Notebook B
photofacsimiles, because they were made from photographs taken in 1993
and because Dep. c. 534/1, which included Notebook B, was not foliated
by the Bodleian until January 1995). MWS would paginate her notebook as
she went along, ordinarily at the top outside corner of the page. The
uncanceled text on the first surviving leaf of Notebook B (pages 62/63,
the "62" conjectural—see transcription page 343 in this edition) follows
directly from the text on the slip of paper (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 18)
that links Notebooks A and B. This first surviving page 62 may have in
fact been the first page of the Draft in Notebook B, but the two missing
leaves in the first Quire (see Quiring Charts below) allow for an
alternate hypothesis that the original and now missing pages [58-61]
actually started Notebook B. If that were the case, then the rewrite
inserts "X" and "Y" (which begin with a page "57") would have been
rewrites of what would have been the last page [57] used in Notebook A
(a verso consistent with page 21, the last surviving verso of Notebook
A's original sequence) together with the first pages [58-61] of Notebook
B. Yet another hypothesis (but a less likely one because of the
existence of the six light-blue leaves that were still available in
Notebook A, possibly as late as April 1817, to be used for inserts "X"
and " Y") is that a substantial portion of the original and now missing
pages [22-61] were actually drafted in Notebook B, in effect requiring
that MWS used one or possibly two preliminary (now missing) quires of
Notebook B for her Draft after the last surviving page 21 of Notebook A.
Of course, all of these scenarios recreating the process of composition
are premised on MWS having first written that "very long" Vol. II, Ch.
[4] back in December 1816, then having shortened and revised that
chapter, and then in the process having revised Ch. [5] once more in the
"X" and "Y" inserts (see transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition
as well as the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 5 December 1816; see also
"Second Insert Pages" and "Third Insert Slip" in the description of
Notebook A above).


