*xlii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**Ruling in Notebook B:** MWS chose not to rule Notebook B with a
penciled left margin, but she allowed a left margin on almost all of
these 150 pages for her and PBS's later revisions.

**Insert Pages in Notebook B:** There is one insert slip of different
paper at folio 38 (see pages 418-419 in this edition), and there is one
rewrite/insert section of three leaves taken from elsewhere in Notebook
B. Both of these insertions reflect MWS's response to PBS's suggestion
that Victor rather than his father originate the idea of traveling to
England in Draft Vol. II, Ch. 10 (see pages 416-441 in this edition).
Each of these insertions demands further description.

**First Insert Slip (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 38):** This first insert was
written on a slip of paper that was cannibalized from the lower part of
the address leaf of a letter from William Godwin to MWS, postmarked
9/[A]P/[1]817^21^ (see pages 418-419 in this edition), providing a
*terminus ante quem non* for MWS writing this insertion. This date
actually dovetails nicely with the intensive period of correcting the
draft that MWS recorded in her Marlow Journal for 10-17 April 1817 (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for these dates). In addition to sets
of pin holes revealing that this paper slip was pinned to the preceding
folio 37, both folios 37 recto and 38 recto are marked by a large
numeral "1" to indicate the sequence of the text (numerals "2," "3,"
"4," and "5" concern the Second Insert described below). This slip is
laid paper, of British origin, that measures 104-112 x 189 mm., yielding
an estimated bifolium measurement of [?] x 378 mm. From the "felt" side
of the paper, the watermark reads "GO[LDING | &] | SNE[LGROVE]" (see
Beta-Radiographs, Fig. 9). The rest of the letter is not present in the
Abinger file of Godwin's letters to the Shelleys at the Bodleian (Dep.
c. 524), which does, however, have other examples of this "GOLDING &
SNELGROVE" paper (e.g., letters to PBS of 12 May and of 4 July 1817,
both with a watermark date of "1814") to allow the definite
reconstruction of the missing letters in the watermark of the slip.

**Second Insert Pages (Dep. c. 534/l~,~ folios 41-43):** This second
insertion was written on three leaves (one still-joined bifolium [folios
41-42] and one singleton [folio 43]) that, with the same color and
sewing holes as the paper in Notebook B, were almost certainly
cannibalized from another and presumably later quire in this same
notebook. Because MWS wrote this text according to PBS's recommendation
on folio 39 verso and because she made the first of these revisions on
the slip of paper evidently between 9 and 17 April 1817^22^ (and marked
"1"—see First Insert above), she made the revisions marked "2" through
"5" on this Second Insert at the same period of time.

The pagination of these leaves is different from MWS's usual pattern in
Notebook B: folio 41 recto was paginated "101" but at the top left
(rather than the top right of a recto) and without the characteristic
parenthesis-like line separating the number from the body of the text;
folio 41 verso was paginated "102" at the top center in a way recalling
or anticipating the pagination of the Fair Copy; and folios 42-43 were
left unpaginated. For the ways these insert pages revise and repeat the
text that MWS canceled in the original pages 100-102,^23^ see the
explanation on transcription pages 417 and 429 in this edition. The
large numerals 2-5 next to the canceled text signal the sequence of the
replacement text in the insert pages. As I suggest on transcription page
417, it is possible that MWS made different insertions on 5 or more
insert slips of paper but then decided to cancel the entire text on
original pages 100-102 and to rewrite the entire section in one place.
She apparently began her rewrite after, rather than before, she
carefully removed the bifolium and singleton from a later quire in the
notebook, writing the new text on the removed leaves while she had the
old text open before her.^24^ This would help to explain, without
reference to a central bifolium, the writing on folio 41 verso where the
words run over to the still joined but otherwise blank folio 42 recto;
it would also help to explain the nature of the wet offset ink blots
that are described in the note on transcription page 435 in this
edition. For more information on this entire set of revisions that MWS
made in April 1817, consult all of pages 416-441 in this edition.


