Introduction *xlv*

**Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2**

(Dep. c. 534/2, folios 1-18 and 19-29=Pages 646-719 and 720-771 in this
edition) (With Dep. c. 534/2 insert folio 30 and substitute folio
31=Pages 772-777 in this edition)

**Paper, Watermarks, Covers, and Sewing Holes:** Fair-Copy Notebooks C1
and C2 survive in a total of 29 leaves of British laid paper, all of the
same character and size, cream color (now yellowing), with edges that
were commercially cut, and with leaves measuring 223-225 x 176-191 mm.
(the leaf width varying so much because of careless cutting after the
drafting of the text into the notebooks), yielding an estimated
bifolium-sheet size of 223-225 x *c.* 353-367 mm., and a minimum
whole-sheet size of *c.* 358-367 x 446-450 mm. It can be deduced that
technically the leaves were made up into notebooks of quarto format,
each consisting of a quire with 24 leaves (or 48 pages) that were sewn
at three central stations (the absence of glue residue indicates that
these quires were bound as single notebooks rather than bound together
like Notebooks A and B).^25^

Each notebook has watermarks split across the reconstructed folds: from
the "felt" side, the watermarks on the surviving eighteen leaves of C1
read posthorn in a crowned shield over the monogrammed letters "P & S"
(see Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 10-11); and the watermarks on the surviving
eleven leaves of Notebook C2 read "PHIPPS & SON | 1809” (see
Beta-Radiographs, Figs. 12-13). The way that the "P & S" watermark in C1
reflects the "PHIPPS & SON" watermark in C2 (together with the fact that
the measurements of the leaves in C1 and C2 are identical) means that
the two notebooks were made from the same paper, presumably originally
supplied by a mill in large whole sheets that contained both watermarks.
There are no other recognizable examples of this paper in the Bodleian
Shelley collections.

In all likelihood, MWS used a total of [?eleven] notebooks for
transcribing her Draft into a Fair Copy (for this estimate, see
"Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of *Frankenstein*" below).
The two partially extant Notebooks C1 and C2 and the [?nine] now missing
notebooks were quite probably matching single-quire, soft-cover
notebooks (or exercise books) that were available from many British
stationers at this time.^26^ Notebooks C1 and C2 give ample evidence
that MWS (and PBS) fair copied the novel while the leaves were still
conjoint in the sewn notebooks, for it is clear that the writing on many
leaves was torn or cut through when the notebooks were disassembled. The
leaves seem to have been removed from the notebooks by different
methods: in C1 they were extracted with three hacking cuts, from the top
edge to the first sewing hole, from there to the third sewing hole, and
from there to the bottom edge; in C2 the outer leaves (folios 19, 20,
24-29) were severed down the second halves of the bifolia (leaving in
the first halves a large stub at the bottom of the gutter and in the
second halves a vertical wedge-shaped strip missing at the top) whereas
the inner leaves (folios 21-22, 23) were torn out rather than cut—see
the photofacsimiles of Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2.

All of these notebooks would have made a reasonably tidy set to
circulate to other publishers until Lackington accepted the novel in
August/September 1817, after which time the notebooks would have been
disbound and used as printer's copy. With the exception of pages 175-187
that PBS transcribed into Notebook C2 (pages that MWS later
re-transcribed, apparently before 3 August 1817), the extant pages of
the Fair Copy give evidence (ink fingerprints, compositor's initials and
notations,^27^ and folds in the paper) of having been used by the
compositors to set the type for the novel. See "*Frankenstein*
Chronology" for 3 August 1817 as well as the footnotes on pages 647-777
in this edition for additional information on the disposition of these
Notebooks; see "Substitute Pages" below for additional information on
MWS's re-transcription of the PBS Fair Copy.

There are additional sewing holes (three, four, or five) in the corners
of the extant Fair-Copy leaves that were almost certainly made after the
notebooks were disbound. Although it is impossible to determine if the
leaves were tagged together with thread before, while, or after they
were at the printer, this rough sewing most likely was done in order to
secure them together after the printing was finished. (One small piece
of white thread is still in one of the sewing holes in the last leaf of
the Fair Copy, the only surviving leaf of MWS's


