*xlvi* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

re-transcriptlon of PBS's Fair Copy.) Most of these leaves (with the
exception of PBS's Fair Copy, which did not go to the printer) also
evidence folds that seem to result from their having been posted to or
from the printer, and three of the leaves (folios 20 and 23 [pages
143/144 and 167/168]--as well as folio 31 [the substitute
re-transcription leaf taken from another notebook] have pleats from the
paper having been crumpled and reflattened, possibly while the leaves
were in the composing room of the printer).

There is one curious characteristic about the pages from the Fair-Copy
Notebooks, namely that MWS followed an exact pattern by writing more
lines on one side of each leaf. The extant leaves of Notebooks C1 and C2
show that in the first half of the notebook (up to and including the
first leaf of the central bifolium) MWS wrote 14 lines on every recto
and 19 lines on every verso; she then would reverse the pattern in the
second half of the notebook, that is, from the second leaf of the
central bifolium to the end of the notebook. (For more specifics, see
the footnote on transcription page 649 in this edition: and note that
PBS did not follow MWS'\`s exact pattern when he undertook the fair
copying near the end of Notebook C2; also note that MWS apparently
abandoned that pattern when she re-transcribed PBS's Fair Copy because
the notebook pages used for the re-transcription had an equal number of
commercially ruled lines on each page.) What caused or enabled MWS to
follow such an exact and exacting pattern is not known: it is possible
that she used some form of template, but the intersections of a 14-line
and a 19-line page on opposite sides of one leaf do not seem to prevent
or diminish any kind of aggravating bleed-through or show-through that
might make for difficult reading. Because the surviving substitute leaf
still has faint traces of commercial ruling and because that leaf came
from a notebook that might have been similar to Notebooks C1 and C2,
then it is quite possible that all of these pages in Notebooks C1 and C2
had faint commercial ruling that has totally disappeared since MWS
copied her novel. That kind of ruling would help explain the change of
pattern at the central bifolium, but that still does not explain why
there was an apparently random choice of 14 lines on one side of each
bifolium and 19 lines on the other. PBS's not following the pattern does
not prove anything one way or the other: he might have ignored faint
commercial ruled lines in hopes of getting all of the rest of the Draft
into this last Fair-Copy Notebook.

**Dating of Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 andC2:** (18 April-[?13] May 1817):
See "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for these dates, for the first of which
(18 April) MWS entered "Transcribe" in her journal and for the last of
which (a cumulative entry for 10-13 May) she entered "Finish
transcribing." In this same Journal on 14 May, MWS entered that PBS
"corrects F." and that she did "write Preface—Finis"; by 26 May, Byron's
publisher John Murray had read some or all of the [?eleven] Fair-Copy
Notebooks (see MWS *Journal*, I,168-169 and 171).

**Foliation and Pagination in Notebooks C1 and C2:** The Quiring Charts
below (prepared by Bruce Barker-Benfield) provide the best sense of both
Bodleian foliation and MWS pagination in the notebook. Ink and other
evidence suggest that MWS paginated the notebooks as she went along,
possibly a few pages at a time. Page numbers are centered at the top of
each page. It also appears that MWS paginated the last thirteen pages of
the Fair Copy, the pages on which PBS transcribed the Draft into
Notebook C2, all at one time, apparently after PBS made his
transcription.

The Quiring Charts indicate that Notebook C1 began on page 91. If the
preceding but now missing notebooks were identical to C1 and C2 (each
having 48 pages), then the Fair Copy of Volume III of the novel would
have occupied most and possibly all of a total of four notebooks: the
missing 90 pages would have occupied 45 of the 48 leaves available in
the two notebooks preceding C1 and C2; and 97 pages (pages 91-187) would
have occupied Notebooks C1 and C2 (supplemented by one Insert Page, for
which see below). "Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy" below
suggests that MWS may not have used a new notebook to begin Volume III
(or, for that matter, Volume II) of the Fair Copy—if that were the case
and if the preceding notebooks had 24 leaves each, then MWS would have
begun page 1 of Volume III of the Fair Copy on folio 4 recto of the now
missing 24-page notebook, the first three leaves of which would have
been used for the final five or six pages of the Fair Copy of Volume II.
One variation to these numbers would result if one or both of these
notebooks were 26-leaf (or 52-page) notebooks, a possibility suggested
by some of the numbers that MWS and PBS entered on the Draft of the
novel.


