***List of Beta-Radiographs in The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

The beta-radiographs listed below have been selected as a representative
sample of the watermarks in the Notebooks. As positioned, each
beta-radiograph shows the watermark-pattern as most intelligibly viewed,
irrespective of its current position on the individual leaf. However, an
attempt to describe the position of each watermark relative to its leaf
(but not to its original whole sheet as manufactured) is made in the
captions. These captions also distinguish by "recto" or "verso" the side
of the leaf from which the watermark is to be viewed (further
distinguished as the "mould" or "felt" side of the paper). [The
concluding square brackets further identify the Notebook from which the
leaf came, as well as the page number (in italics) in this edition where
the photofacsimile of that recto or verso may be viewed.]

There are three kinds of pairings in the sample beta-radiographs below:
pairs where the bifolium contains two different watermarks, one on each
side (see Figs. 7-8, where the once conjoint leaves have been
separated); pairs where the fold of a bifolium splits a watermark into
two halves (see Figs. 1-2 and 3-4, where leaves once conjoint were later
separated by tearing across the watermark at the fold; and Figs. 10-11,
where leaves once conjoint were later separated by cutting across the
watermark near the fold); and artificially constructed pairs (see Figs.
12-13 for one watermark that is constructed from two leaves that were
not originally conjoint; and see Figs. 5-6 for two watermarks that would
ordinarily be divided by the fold of a bifolium but in this case are
taken from two leaves that were not originally conjoint).

Fig. 1. Fig. 2. Fig. 3. Fig. 4. Fig. 5. Fig. 6. Fig. 7. Fig. 8. Fig. 9.

Fig. 10. Fig. 11. Fig. 12.

Fig. 13. Fig. 14. Fig. 15.

Fig. 16.

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 27 verso [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook A: page *122*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 33 recto [= "mould" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook A: page *148*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 34 recto [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook A: page *152*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 26 verso [="mould" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook A: page *118*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 3 recto [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook A
insert: page *24*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 2 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook A
insert: page *22*]

Dep. c. 534/1, folio 89 recto [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook B:
page *622*]

Dep. c. 534/1, folio 94 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [Notebook B:
see page *642* for folio 94 recto]

Dep. c. 534/1, folio 38 verso [="felt" side], sideways at lower outside
corner [Notebook B insert:

page *418*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 3 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C1: page *656*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 10 verso [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C1: page *686*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 21 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C2: page *732*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 23 verso [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C2: page *744*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 30 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C2 insert: page *772*]

Dep. c. 534/2, folio 31 recto [="felt" side], sideways at inner edge
[Notebook C2 substitute: page

*774*]

Dep. c. 477/1, folio 63 verso [="felt" side], rev., center [The Cyrus
Fragment: page *826*]

*xlix*


