Introduction *lvii*

***Naming in The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

The names of the characters in *Frankenstein* are important for many
reasons, not the least being that naming is a ritual event—indeed, a
symbolic event—by which the namer (e.g., the parent baptizing a child)
exercises an authority over the named. Nothing brings this truth home
more than my facing the responsibility of naming the unnamed being
created by Victor Frankenstein—should I denominate him "being" or
"creature" or "monster" or any number of other cognomens (e.g.,
"wretch"), all names that are in the novel, although each is filtered
through the consciousnesses of Walton, Victor, the "monster" himself,
and the De Laceys?^30^ MWS herself avoided giving him a name in the
novel, and after she saw a dramatic production of *Frankenstein* in 1823
she approved the use of "--------" for the character played "by M^r^ T.
Cooke: this nameless mode of naming the un{n}ameable is rather good"
(see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 9 September 1823). My choice of
name will undoubtedly dictate a response, and I am certain that some
readers up to this point have been dissatisfied with my calling their
"creature" a "monster," a choice culturally conditioned, I am sure, by
the movie incarnations of *Frankenstein*, but a choice in keeping with
both MWS and PBS begging (or, more likely, posing) the question of the
name, in keeping with what MWS said about the monster in her *1831*
Introduction and elsewhere, and in keeping with my own personal reading
of the novel.

I have attempted to be as objective and factual as possible in editing
this novel, and I do not intend to offer any extensive analysis at this
point. However, I will indulge myself in a paragraph and acknowledge
that I teach *Frankenstein* as a doppelgänger novel, one in which MWS
used all of the major characters to reflect parts of Victor
Frankenstein's psychological being. In some ways the novel ends the
night that it originally began with the words "It was on a dreary night
of November." That is to say, Victor committed psychic suicide that
night when he created the monster: his pursuit of knowledge caused him
to destroy love, to "procrastinate" and to "weaken" his "affections"--in
effect to deal his heart a mortal wound, the heart represented by
Clerval ("the image of [his] former self") and by Elizabeth (called the
"living spirit of love" in *1831*, page 25; for the other quotations
above, see transcription pages 91, 93, 97, and 453 in this edition). And
the rest of the novel may be read as an externalization, a
literalization of that psychic suicide: Victor in the form of the
monster actually killed the better part of himself in the form of
Clerval and Elizabeth. In other words, Victor the creature usurped the
powers of a creator: he left his Eden of Geneva and family and fell from
innocence to experience while eating of the tree of knowledge at
Ingolstadt. In that fall Victor became psychologically disfigured, and
the "creature" (who was initially born in the image of his creator) was
destined (with the creative artist MWS controlling this "destiny") to
mirror his creator's fall from psychological wholeness and to die
finally as a "monster." I have merely chosen to denominate the unnamed
with his last name rather than his first.

Even MWS in her *1831* Introduction called the monster a "hideous
phantasm," a "horrid thing," and a "hideous progeny."^31^ By these
phrases, she seems to have avoided both "creature" and "monster"—and
therefore probably intended to implicate the reader in name calling. I
concede the point of many critics (and even PBS) who prefer to call this
monster a "being" or a "creature" because his monstrosity was
"occasioned" (and I choose that word with care) by Victor and by other
circumstances—even PBS in his *Athenæum* review of the novel (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 10 November 1832) referred most often to
the "Being" and once to the "tremendous creature" whose only association
with the "monstrous" was in the "circumstances of his existence."
Although PBS did not quite acquit the Being of his "crimes and
malevolence," he argued that they "flow inevitably from certain causes
fully adequate to their production. They are the children, as it were,
of Necessity and Human Nature." What sounds a little bit like Heredity
vs. Environment is really almost all the latter, because for PBS both
"Necessity" and "Human Nature" (apparently, the nature of other humans;
if not that, then something akin to "destiny") seem to assign more blame
to others than to the Being. As PBS would have it, "Treat a person ill,
and he will become wicked." I can understand but cannot agree with PBS
or with others who prefer to cast the blame primarily or exclusively on
that which lies outside the individual. In short, I sympathize with the
monster and prefer him to Victor, but I also judge that he is culpable
for monstrous acts of murder and revenge—and PBS should have judged him
by the same standard that he used in 1819 to judge Beatrice Cenci:
"Revenge, retaliation, atonement, are pernicious mistakes." Indeed, the
PBS of 1819 would have been a better reviewer of the 1818 novel, and I
here appropriate what PBS said about Beatrice Cenci: "It is in the
restless and anatomizing casuistry with which men seek the justification
or [the


