*lviii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

monster], yet feel that [he]^32^ has done what needs justification; it
is in the superstitious horror with which they contemplate alike [his]
wrongs and their revenge; that the dramatic character of what [he] did
and suffered, consists" (PBS *Cenci*, page x). Such a sentence reveals
the genius of PBS as dramatist and the genius of MWS as novelist—both
wished to implicate the reader in moral dilemmas, and MWS forced a very
hard decision on her editors and her readers.

The names of the other characters in *Frankenstein* are just as
important for the meaning of the novel. Many critics have previously
remarked on the injustice done to *Justine*, on the more masculine
Franken*stein* opposed to a more feminine Cler*val*, and on *Safie* (a
variant of *Sophia)* standing at the center of this novel about the
dangerous consequences of the pursuit of knowledge. Those who study
these etymologies will be delighted to discover in The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks that MWS entertained and used other names for a number of
characters, the most important of which are Elizabeth, Clerval, and
Safie. I am concerned less with the root meanings of these and other
characters' changing names and more with the fact that these changes
give evidence of the ur-text as well as the process and sometimes the
date of revisions in the Notebooks. (For a recent and extended
discussion of the possible sources of some of the names in
*Frankenstein*, especially a single source for the name of
Maimouna/Amina/Safie, see Ketterer, "Draft," pages 250-274.^33^)

**Elizabeth Lavenza** was called "Myrtella" ("myrtle," held sacred by
Venus, was an emblem of love) in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 10, page 117, and in
Ch. 13, page 148, two Notebook A passages that MWS drafted apparently in
November 1816, one before and one after the 20th (see transcription
pages 181 and 243 in this edition). In both cases the most logical
explanation is that MWS was copying from an ur-text where "Myrtella" was
the name of Victor's cousin and betrothed. In both cases the earlier
name was replaced by "Elizabeth," the name MWS had decided upon no later
than early October 1816, by which time she was writing the name
"Elizabeth" on the first extant page of Notebook A (see pages 10-11 in
this edition). There is another and later place in Notebook B where MWS
may have started to write "Myrtella" when she meant to write
"Elizabeth"—see "M Elizabeth" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, original page
102 (see transcription page 441 in this edition), a passage that may
have been drafted in early January 1817. (For the conjectured dates when
MWS was drafting these passages, see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
November 1816 and for January 1817.)

**Henry Clerval** went through a more complicated series of
incarnations. He was evidently called "Henry Carignan" in the ur-text as
well as in the beginning pages of the extant Draft, but within three
pages "Carignan" had become "Clerval": see Draft Vol. I, Ch. [1], page
41, lines 23-24; page 42, lines 35-36; and page 43, line 8 (pages 10-15
in this edition). MWS would have made this change no later than early
October 1816, and "Clerval" (or the variant "Clairval") was the form
used throughout the remainder of the novel. The abandoned name
"Carignan" has been glossed in *1818 Crook* (page 25) in a note to the
spa town of Thonon that Victor and his family visited when he was
thirteen ("eleven" in the Draft). According to Crook, Thonon had been
recently restored to the kingdom of Piedmont and Sardinia, the second in
line for the throne of which was Charles Albert Savoy-Carignan, whose
irregular Rousseauesque education was a matter of some concern at the
time. Crook then hinted that MWS might have had something in mind with
Clerval's earlier name when she suggested that "these topicalities may
lie, displaced, behind *Frankenstein*."

Not only the topical or the literary stood behind some of the names in
MWS's fiction—she also would name her characters with reference to or
echoes of the names among her circle of acquaintances. Such seems to be
the case with "Clerval," which recalls "Clairmont"—not so much Claire
Clairmont but rather Charles Clairmont, whose interest in languages
parallels that of Henry Clerval. At one period while drafting her novel,
MWS appears to have made the echo even greater, for there are twenty
places in Notebook B where the name is "Clairval" (only later was the
"ai" canceled and replaced by an "e" in nineteen of these places, the
cancelations most likely made at one sitting in April/May 1817—see below
for more on this dating). Because the variations on Clerval's name can
lead to very misleading suppositions,^34^ I offer the following
chronology that best explains what happened.


