Introduction *lix*

**[?June-late September] 1816:** "Carignan" in the ur-text (see above
for explanation).

**[no later than early October] 1816:** "Carignan" written and then
canceled and then replaced by "Clerval" in Draft: Vol. I, Ch. [1] (see
above for explanation).

**[?early January 1817]:** "Clairval" was the name in Draft: Vol. II,
Ch. 10, original page 100, but "Clerval" was the name later in this
chapter on original pages 101-103. This apparently incorrect or at least
inconsistent "Clairval" was not separately corrected to "Clerval" (see
below for the nineteen places where MWS did alter "Clairval" to
"Clerval"), but the passage in which "Clairval" appeared was canceled by
MWS between 18 April and 10/13 May 1817 (see pages 416-427 in this
edition for the dating of the cancelations), making the separate
alteration unnecessary. When an unpaginated insert was added to Ch. 10
in April/May 1817, "Clerval" was used (see transcription page 435 in
this edition).

**[?early January 1817] and [?18 March-9 April 1817]:** The one use of
"Clairval" in Ch. 10 (possibly a mistake occasioned by MWS often writing
out the names "Claire" and "Clairmont" in letters) may have prompted MWS
to change the spelling of the name, for the next nineteen instances of
the name in Draft: Vol. II, Chs. 11-17, were "Clairval," each of which
was altered to "Clerval" at a later time, most likely in April/May 1817
at one sitting when MWS was fair copying her novel. The first "ai" that
is canceled and replaced by "e" is in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 11 [renumbered
"2" for the three-volume sequence], page 108 (see pages 452-453 in this
edition): the dark ink on the renumbered chapter "2" seems to be the
same as that used for the alterations of "Clairval" to "Clerval."

**[?early April 1817]:** By this time, MWS had decided on "Clerval" as
evidenced by the six instances of that spelling in Draft: Vol. II, Ch.
18, and by the four instances of that spelling in the extant Fair Copy.

**[?April/May 1817]:** MWS altered the nineteen instances of "Clairval"
to "Clerval," most likely during the time she was fair copying her
novel.

Safie most likely was not in the ur-text, and when she was introduced
into that "very long" Chapter 4 that MWS wrote in late November/early
December (she finished it by 5 December—see "*Frankenstein* Chronology"
as well as transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition), she was
apparently first called "Maimouna," a name that may be traced to Robert
Southey's Maimuna in *Thalaba*, a name that PBS used as a nickname for
his friend Mrs. Boinville and that he used in his prose fragment "The
Assassins" for Khaled's daughter (a precursor of Cythna in PBS's *Laon
and Cythna*).^35^ The evidence that Safie was first called "Maimouna" is
to be found in Notebook B as well as in the "X" and "Y" rewrite inserts
that MWS used to help join Notebooks A and B in April 1817. When MWS
started to rewrite this section of her novel on the yet remaining paper
from Notebook A (and we lack any manuscript evidence for earlier
sections of the Safie episode), she first changed the already
denominated "Maimouna" to "Amina" and used that name four times on
Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page 59 and page 60 ["X" insert] but then
mistakenly reverted to "Maimouna" (only to change it to "Amina") one
more time on page 60. MWS then decided to rewrite this "X" insert with a
"Y" insert by which time she had decided on the name "Safie," a name
that MWS apparently did not use in her novel prior to April 1817.^36^
She continued her narrative about the newly named "Safie" up through
half of Draft: Ch. [5], page 59+64 ["Y" insert] and then doubled back to
use already existing text in "X" where she replaced the short-lived
"Amina" with "girl" in one place (on page 59) and with the new name of
"Safie" three times (twice on page 59 and once on page 60). Pen and ink
evidence suggest that MWS had stopped writing on the "X" pages at line
25; having reached that point by doubling back, she then began again to
write her revised narrative at lines 25 and 26 of Draft: Vol. II, Ch.
[5], page 60 ["X" insert], from which point Safie was called only
"Safie." "Safie" continued to be the unemended name as MWS finished the
rewrite on "X" and then returned to the "Y" insert and began again to
rewrite her narrative at lines 13-14 in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], page
59+64 ["Y" insert]. (Those not wishing to follow all these intricacies
are invited merely to follow the narrative in the sequence I have
outlined by reading the unshadowed sections in pages 317-341 in this
edition.) That all of these changes from the original "Maimouna" to the
short-lived and intermediating "Amina" to the final "Safie" were made in
April 1817 (after MWS had finished all or most of her Draft) is
indicated by the fact that MWS continued to use the original "Maimouna"
in the remaining chapters of Notebook B: see transcription pages 353,
359,


