*lx* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

369, 383, and 605 (this last one dating from late March or early April
1817)—in each of these cases, after MWS began correcting her Draft a few
days later in April, the original "Maimouna" was changed directly to
"Safie," MWS having already tried and then rejected the intermediating
"Amina" when she wrote the "X" and "Y" inserts.

There are additional name changes in the Draft (including adding letters
to finish an initial capital) in *Frankenstein* that show MWS's artistry
at work (the parenthetical page numbers refer the reader to
transcription pages in this edition): the professor "M.K" became "M.
Krempe" (page *55*); the professor "M.W." first became "Mr. Waldham" and
then "M. Waldman" (page 57 and note); "Justine Martin" became "Justine
Moritz" (pages 127 and 133 and notes); the child "Louisa M [or ?B]"
became "Louisa [?Caln (or ?Valn)]" became "Louisa Biron" (page 133); the
pretty "Miss Mansfeld" became "Miss Mansfield" in *1818* without any
evidence for the change in the Draft (pages 133 and 135); the rich
banker "M. Hofland" became "M. Duvillard" in *1818* without any evidence
for the change in the Draft (page 135); Victor's mother "Caroline
Beaumont" became "Caroline Beaufort" in *1818* without any evidence for
the change in the Draft (page 177). "Biron" of course echoes Byron, and
"Duvillard" was the surname of MWS's Swiss maid Elise. All of the names
in the novel, of course, have antecedents, and the name "Frankenstein"
is no exception. Most often, it is linked by way of science and
"lightning" to Benjamin Franklin, but Florescu (pages 58 ff.) has traced
the name to the Castle Frankenstein in Germany that MWS and PBS and
Claire Clairmont may have visited during their six weeks' tour in 1814.
This edition may make it possible for new research on all of the names
in *Frankenstein*.^37^

***Hypothetic ally Reconstructing an Ur-Text of* Frankenstein**

It is dangerous to speculate about the ur-text of *Frankenstein*, for it
could have been very short and inconsequential; and it is possible,
therefore, that everything mediating between such an ur-text and the
Draft was nothing more than now discarded rough drafts of pages and
sections that never had any integrity or identity as a separate text.
However, there are clues in the Draft that MWS may have been copying
from and expanding upon what she called her "story"—an ur-text of some
length that she had written in the summer of 1816. The remarks on the
names above suggest that Frankenstein spent his childhood with Myrtella
and Carignan in that ur-text, and that maybe his mother's maiden name
was Beaumont. However, it should be stressed that every changed name
does not an ur-text character make. Other evidence suggests, e.g., that
the very long chapter about "Maimouna" (who then became "Amina" and then
"Safie") was not drafted or even conceived until late November or early
December 1816.

It is easier to speculate about what was not in the ur-text than to
prove what was there. One way for MWS to enlarge her "story" into a
"book" or novel was to add new characters and incidents to the outside
and to the inside of her frame tale. That is, it is likely that neither
the Captain (Walton from the outside narrative frame) nor the Arabian
(Safie from the innermost tale) was in the original ur-text—and there is
no persuasive manuscript evidence to suggest that they were.^38^ Whether
the other parts of the De Lacey episode were contained in the ur-text,
with a possibly different mechanism for the monster learning to speak
and read, I cannot determine. Everything else, however, may have been
sketched out in one form or another in the summer of 1816. MWS tells us
that the tale began with the line "It was on a dreary night of
November." Reasoning from that fact, we can speculate that the ur-text
had three distinct parts (although it is impossible to determine just
how long each one was): the creation scene; the scenes before the
creation; the scenes after the creation. Evidence for each of these
parts in the ur-text comes from the following sources: (1) MWS's
statements in her Journals, her letters, and her *1831* Introduction;
(2) mistakes in transcription that are best explained as copying rather
than drafting errors; (3) a Draft page or chapter that underwent only
minimal cancelation and revision when it was initially drafted into the
Notebook (suggesting that it was an intermediate Draft that had been
copied from an earlier version); (4) a Draft page or chapter with
relatively full and/or precise pointing, suggesting that MWS and/or PBS
had worked through the punctuation in an earlier complete draft; and,
finally, (5) references in a part of the ur-text (hypothetically
reconstructed by means of the evidence


