*lxii*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

(see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 21-27 July and for 24 July 1816).
If that were the case, then in late July and early August she may have
written the first portions of the monster's narrative, the Draft of
which dramatically opens Vol. II, where Chs. 1-3 have the same "clean"
and well-pointed text by which an ur-text could be inferred. If that
were the case, then the ur-text had at least introduced the De Laceys
into the monster's life. After that, inferences get much murkier,
because what appear to have been original pages 22-61 of Vol. II (which
linked Notebooks A and B) are not extant. That there was no ur-text for
much of these now missing pages is suggested by three circumstances: the
missing pages suggest a trauma in the newly conceived text that required
considerable drafting and redrafting; the missing pages were the first
to introduce the story of Safie (initially named "Maimouna"), the
innermost character whom MWS apparently created to expand her "story"
into a "book"; and it appears that MWS was excited enough by writing
this new section about the Arabian to announce to PBS on 5 December 1816
that she had "finished the 4 Chap. of Frankenstein which is a very long
one & I think you would like it" (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for
that date). By hoping that PBS "would like it," MWS is telling us that
the Safie episode (and therefore the chapters in which the monster
learned to read) were not in the ur-text. That all of this text was
relatively new is also suggested by the rewrite Inserts "X" and "Y" (see
pages 314-341 in this edition). In short, the missing forty pages and
the rewrite sections are probably typical antecedents to the kind of
"clean" Draft that makes up most of Notebook A.

Notebook B is a very different matter, and the very fact that it does
not have a vertical pencil rule creating a left margin may tell us
something about how MWS saw the remainder of her task: that she was not
working from an ur-text in the same way she had been in most of Notebook
A. The evidence for such a distinction is circumstantial, but there is a
clear difference between the two manuscript versions of MWS's 1819
novella "Mathilda": her revised and later draft of "Mathilda," which
resembles something between a final Draft and a Fair Copy, has a
distinct pencil ruled margin similar to Notebook A of *Frankenstein*,
whereas the earlier and rougher Draft that MWS entitled "Fields of
Fancy" was drafted on pages that much more resemble Notebook B of
*Frankenstein*, having a margin with no rule and a text in a greater
state of revision and flux.^41^ It is possible that this distinction
between an unruled and a ruled set of pages might have enabled MWS to
keep her drafts in order as she transcribed one from another.

How much of Notebook B was in the ur-text is difficult to conjecture:
the sometimes "clean" text might mean that the monster's confrontation
with the De Laceys (minus Safie) might have been sketched out in the
summer of 1816—as most likely was the monster's murder of William (if it
is inferred that Justine's trial was part of the ur-text). Proceeding
further down this road would transform the ur-text into a mini-novel of
some length, with only the Captain on the outside and the Arabian on the
inside missing from what MWS had drafted in Geneva—that is to say, the
ur-text may also have contained a skeletal form of the chapters in
England and Scotland where Victor began making a mate for the monster
(Draft: Vol. II, Chs. 11-15—see pages 452-543 in this edition) as well
as of the chapters back in Geneva and Evian where the monster murdered
Elizabeth on her wedding night (Chs. 16-17—see pages 544-582).^41^ If
these chapters were in the ur-text, the "busier" look to Notebook B
(and, in many places, its more inexact pointing) suggests that MWS was
doing much more than copying from or embellishing a well-developed
ur-text at this point. Finally, arguing from the likelihood that the
beginning of the Walton frame was never in the ur-text, we can conclude
that most or all of the last scenes in the Arctic were not there as
well. So after all this conjecturing, we end where we began, with the
suspicion that neither Walton nor Safie were part of the ur-text, a text
that may have contained in a shorter form much of the novel as it is
represented by Notebooks A and B.

***Hypothetically Reconstructing the Fair Copy of* Frankenstein**

It is possible to deduce that MWS used eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks when
she (and PBS) transcribed the Draft into a Fair Copy that would become
printer's copy. The easiest way to argue that point is to note how close
the pagination of the extant Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2 was to the
pagination in the *1818* edition: see the headers on transcription page
647 (**Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. [V], page 99 = 1818: Vol. III, Ch. V,
pages 100-101**) and page 749 (**Fair Copy: Vol. III, Ch. VII, page 175
= 1818: Vol. III, Ch. VII, pages 176-178**). Because MWS took
painstaking care in transcribing her text into Notebooks C1 and C2, we
may surmise that the same


