Introduction *lxiii*

care and precision were employed in earlier notebooks and that she fair
copied her Draft in the same way, with a new pagination sequence for
each volume and with a relatively rigid number of words and lines per
page, per leaf, and per notebook. If, then, the page numbers of the
Fair-Copy Notebooks (even allowing for the blank spaces at the ends and
beginnings of chapters, a characteristic of the notebooks as well as of
*1818)* were always close to the page numbers in *1818* (which had 181
pages in Vol. I, 156 pages in Vol. II, and 192 pages in Vol. III), then
there would have been approximately 529 pages (181 + 156 + 192) in the
Fair Copy. If the other notebooks were identical or similar to C1 and C2
(each of which had 48 pages), then the total of eleven notebooks would
have proved just right: 11 x 48 = 528. It almost seems too perfect that
the one extra page in *1818* meant that PBS had to find one extra page
(folio 30 in Dep. c. 534/2) in order to write the last page of the Fair
Copy. Such a calculation is, of course, too perfect, because we know
that MWS and/or PBS made additions to the proofs (that is, there was
text added in *1818* that was not in the Fair Copy). And, of course, MWS
and/or PBS may have totally eliminated (rather than replaced) text in
the proofs that had been in the Fair Copy. But neither of these actions
cast much doubt on the approximation here, that eleven Fair-Copy
Notebooks would have been sufficient to contain the text that produced
*1818.* In fact, there is evidence that some of these notebooks had 52
rather than 48 pages—in each of those cases, a notebook consisted of
thirteen folded sheets that made up 26 leaves or 52 pages.

Further proof that the pagination in both Fair Copy and *1818* were
nearly identical is revealed by the marginal numbers that MWS and PBS
entered on the Draft pages in April/May 1817 when they were recording
and estimating the proportions of the three-volume Fair Copy that they
were creating out of a two-volume Draft. The meaning of all these
numbers (see transcription pages 107, 109, 121, 151, 221, 251, 343, and
393) eluded me until I recognized that the Fair-Copy pagination
approximated the *1818* pagination, enabling me to offer the following
gloss for these otherwise inexplicable numbers.

**"52":** This PBS number on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 7a, page 80, apparently
records the "52" leaves or "104" pages that had been used to fair copy
the Draft up to this point—a glance at transcription page 107 reveals
that the *1818* equivalent is page "105." It is possible that the "52"
meant that the Fair Copy up to this point had used two complete
notebooks of 24 leaves each, plus an additional four leaves in a third
notebook, but there is no end of chapter or like stopping point in the
Draft to warrant the notation. It is more likely that "52" designated
two complete notebooks of 26 leaves each. As will be the case for the
numbers discussed below, a deduction based on number of words rather
than pages would support the same conclusion: the number of *1818* words
up to this point and the estimated number of Draft words (estimated
because half of the pages up to this point are missing) would occupy
approximately two 24- or 26-page notebooks (or ^2^/~11~ of the novel) at
MWS's average of 285 words per leaf evidenced by extant Notebooks C1 and
C2 (the estimate has to be for a leaf because MWS wrote more lines on
one side than the other—see "The Makeup of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks"
above as well as transcription page 649 below).

**"52" together with calculation up to a canceled "156" and an
emphasized "180":** These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 7a, page 81,
appear to calculate the number of pages that were used to transcribe all
of Fair Copy: Vol. I, which amounted to 181 pages in *1818* (see
transcription page 221 in this edition), a number suggesting that Fair
Copy: Vol. I also had approximately 181 pages). If Fair Copy: Vol. I
occupied 180 pages, then it would have filled approximately three and
one-half Fair-Copy Notebooks: in PBS's calculations, one number "52"
denoted 52 leaves that generated "104" pages (that is, two 26-leaf
notebooks); another "52" appears to denote "52" pages (one 26-leaf
notebook); the number "24" appears to denote 24 pages (that is, half of
a 24-leaf notebook or almost half of a 26-leaf notebook); and the sum
"180" denoted the estimated or actual total of 180 Fair-Copy pages used
for Vol. I.^43^ These calculations were very important to the Shelleys,
who were attempting (in April/May 1817) to divide the two-volume Draft
into a three-volume Fair Copy, a process that demanded accurate
estimates of the number of pages per volume. Moreover, the evidence of
Notebooks C1 and C2 suggest that MWS was preparing very fine fair copies
to impress a publisher—and that (as a daughter of a publisher) she might
have been writing to rule, transcribing in such a way (with faintly
ruled lines or with a template) that she knew approximately how many
words she was getting to each page, to each notebook, and to each volume
(Godwin may have been equally aware of such matters when he entered page
numbers of his drafts into his Diary).


