*lxiv* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**"Ch V- 113":** This MWS number on Draft: Vol. I., Ch. 7b, page 87, was
not written in the Autumn of 1817 and did not refer to the fact that
*1818*: Vol. I, Ch. V, began on page 114 (with the implication that
there was a change from proof to revise, or that MWS got the number
wrong by one); rather, because the Fair-Copy pages approximated the
*1818* pages, this number reveals MWS recording in April/May 1817 that
she was beginning this Fair Copy: Vol. I, Ch. V on page 113—that is,
113/180ths through Vol. I. (With a little more maths, it would be
possible to estimate just what day between 18 April and 13 May that MWS
made this entry.)

**"20" and "15":** These [?MWS] numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 8, page
102, seem to be echoed by the PBS numbers of "20" + "37" = "57" on page
137 (for which, see below), but I am not certain what they mean.
Although they may refer to the number of pages MWS had just transcribed,
they more likely suggest that it took approximately twenty pages of Fair
Copy to transcribe fifteen pages of Draft. That 75% relationship may
have been become clear to the Shelleys as they continued to transcribe.
Although the Fair-Copy pages are not extant at this point to offer exact
percentages, there is a 76% relationship between the estimated 180
Fair-Copy pages for Vol. I and the 143 pages of Draft up to that point
(if we, as the Shelleys might have done, forget about the 6 insert pages
at the beginning of the extant Notebook A).

**"20" + "37" = "57":** These PBS numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 12, page
137, seem to echo the "20" + "15" on page 102 (for which, see above). It
is possible that "57" may have something to do with the 57 pages between
page 80 (where PBS first entered a number) and this page 137—or with the
58 pages between page 102 (where MWS last entered numbers) and page 160
(where Vol. I. ends).

**"100" and "130" with calculations to a sum of "205":** These PBS
numbers on Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 14, page 152, seem to indicate that MWS
had used "205" Fair-Copy pages, an amount that approximates the *1818*
pages used to this point: 181 pages (in Vol. I) + 21 pages (in Vol. II)
= 202 pages. This number also suggests that MWS had just finished the
4th Fair-Copy Notebook (three notebooks of 26 leaves each [=156 pages]
plus one notebook of 26 or 24 leaves [=52 or 48 pages] would equal 208
or 204 pages).

**"169" and "191" and the sums leading up to these numbers:** These two
sums on Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62 (the first extant page of
Notebook B), seem to be estimates of the number of pages that will be
occupied by Fair Copy: Vol. II and Fair Copy: Vol. III. MWS started her
sums leading up to "169" with the number "98" and ended it with "97"—one
of these numbers suggests the now missing Fair Copy: Vol. II, Ch. [VI],
page *97* or page 98 (a number in tandem with *1818:* Vol. II, Ch. VII,
page 98, where Ch. VII begins (see transcription page 343, which is the
first extant page of Notebook B). The sum of "169" either records or
predicts the total number of pages in Draft: Vol. II (in that *1818:*
Vol. II had a total of 156 pages).

PBS seems to have used a similar form of calculation to reach his sum of
"191," a number that most likely records or estimates the 191 pages in
Fair Copy: Vol. III (in that *1818:* Vol. III had 192 pages). The fact
that these important numbers are on the first extant page of Notebook B
suggests that this page 62 was in fact the first page of Notebook B, at
least in April/May when the Shelleys transcribed the Draft into a Fair
Copy (and when they were doing these calculations). This conclusion
supports my hypothesis elsewhere that the missing pages that at one time
joined Notebooks A and B were probably from Notebook A.

**"310":** This PBS number (which could possibly be "320") on Draft:
Vol. II, Ch. 8, page 87, is most likely a record of just how many pages
had been used in the Fair Copy up to this point, a number confirmed by
the number of equivalent *1818* pages: 181 (in Vol. I) + 136 (up to this
point in Vol. II) = 317. This number may also tell us that the Shelleys
had just finished their 6th Fair-Copy Notebook: we already suspect the
first two notebooks used 52 pages each, and the third notebook may have
had 52 pages, yielding 156 pages in all— if the next three Notebooks had
the same number of pages, the six notebooks would have had a usable
total of 312 pages, 310 of which were used to transcribe the Draft up to
this point. Even if the number were "320" rather than "310" and the
transcription had continued into the next notebook for a few pages, the
estimated 529 pages of Fair Copy (based on the total number of *1818*
pages) minus 310 pages (or 320) already used, meant that there would be
219 (or 209) pages yet to transcribe, an amount that could have been
accommodated in the five remaining notebooks (\#'s 7-11), even if all of
them were 48-page notebooks: 5 notebooks x 48 pages = 240 pages.


