Introduction *lxv*

A final word on PBS's involvement in the Fair Copy: because he recorded
most of the numbers discussed above and made most of the calculations,
it may look like he was involved in transcribing the Draft into the Fair
Copy at these points. However, all other evidence suggests the contrary:
PBS would not have wanted his hand to be in a Fair Copy that was to be
kept anonymous; and the kinds of embellishments that PBS introduced into
MWS's text when he did fair copy the Draft at the end of Notebook C2
(see Appendix A in order to contrast MWS following the Draft and PBS
embellishing the Draft) are not present in the *1818* text around the
places where PBS made the computations. Consequently, it is more likely
that the PBS numbers are there because MWS asked him to make the
computations for her as she fair copied her Draft in April/May 1817.

***Other Numbers and the Dates in The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

The computations that MWS and PBS performed in the margins of the
Notebooks A and B indicate what numbers can do (and reveal), and in
various places in this edition I have made computations to remark on the
blank "spaces" caused by missing pages in the Draft and the Fair Copy.
See, e.g., the notes on transcription pages 2, 6, and 9 for computations
that gloss pages 1-40 missing from Draft Notebook A; see also the note
on transcription page 777 for computed words per leaf indicating that
the two extant re-transcription pages 185/MWS-186/MWS were actually part
of fifteen MWS re-transcription pages (all of which would have been sent
to the printer). Other numbers (e.g., the very exact transcribing
pattern of 19 lines on one side of a Fair-Copy leaf and 14 lines on the
other, yielding an average of 285 words per leaf—see transcription page
649), together with other evidence, lead to the conclusion that there
were eleven Fair-Copy Notebooks. And the average of 285 words on each
Fair-Copy leaf permitted accurate estimates of what was written on now
missing pages from Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2 (see transcription
pages 651, 731, 740-741, and 747). In short, much of what is missing
from The *Frankenstein* Notebooks can be reconstructed from available
evidence.

In other places, MWS used a different form of pagination (citing earlier
pagination) to leave herself a trail through the convoluted Insert
sections "X" and "Y" (see pages 314-341). She also left a trail of
numbers "1" through "5" in Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10, pages 416-441,
revealing the sequence of revisions that she made to her Draft between
10 and 17 April 1817. Finally, the accident of MWS writing on a slip of
paper on the verso of which was a reconstructible postmark of 9 April
1817 sheds a great deal of light on the makeup of The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks.^44^

The specific and important date of 9 April 1817 calls to mind an
important moment in the text of *Frankenstein*, when Victor related his
story to the magistrate "briefly, but with firmness and precision,
marking the dates with accuracy" (see transcription page 577 in this
edition). As is so often the case, what happens inside the text reflects
what happens outside or with the text; that is, MWS herself in The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks marked the dates with precision, and the
alterations she made in the dates (together with other clues) reveal
that she was very concerned with the chronology in her novel. Even
though Walton's letters are dated with the decade of the eighteenth
century missing, MWS has given enough information for us to determine
three important points about the chronology: that the novel begins with
Walton's letter dated 11 December 17[96] (which is, or is very close to,
the day on which MWS imagined she was conceived);^45^ that Walton's tale
takes the gestation period of 276 days in the telling; and that the
novel ends with Walton's last letter of 12 September 17[97], thirteen
days after MWS was born and two days after her mother died. The clues to
this reading of the chronology have long been available in the printed
texts of *1818* and *1831*—what the Notebooks supply is graphic evidence
that MWS, like Victor, was carefully "marking the dates with accuracy."

A perpetual calendar gives more than enough evidence to establish a
chronology for all the plots in *Frankenstein* (although there is one
major inconsistency). Walton leaves a clue in the outside frame when he
remarks that he first saw the monster on "Monday (July 31st)" in the
year "17—" (see Walton's Letter IV on transcription page 5); among the
years in the eighteenth century when 31 July fell on a Monday is 1797, a
year that is confirmed by a number of facts, one of which (as Mellor has
remarked) is that the monster read


