*lxvi* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

a copy of Volney's *Ruins of Empire*, which was not published until
1791, thereby eliminating all other possible years in the 1700s when 31
July fell on a Monday. MWS left a second clue in Alphonse's letters to
Victor in which it was announced that Victor's brother William had been
murdered by the monster on "Thursday (May 7th)," the reading in *1818.
A* glance at pages 154-155 in this edition will show that MWS approached
this date with considerable care: she first wrote "May 26" (which would
have been the year 1796) and then immediately canceled "26" and replaced
it with "28^th^", thereby indicating that she wished to get the year
right (there would be little reason else for the two-day change).
Eventually, in the missing Fair Copy or in proofs, the date was changed
to "May 7th", a date still consistent (exactly three weeks earlier) with
the year that MWS had in mind, apparently the year 1795 (when the 28th
and the 7th fell on Thursdays). I could invoke Volney again to establish
the decade as the 1790s, but I am reluctant to use that means because
some critics have raised questions about MWS quoting from not only
Coleridge's *Rime of the Ancient Mariner* (1798) but also such poems as
Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey" (1798) and PBS's *Alastor* (1816). That
kind of anachronism, however, is not at all unusual in fiction, when a
narrative that is set in the past might contain a quotation from or
allusion to a later poem. The monster reading Volney is quite a
different thing indeed, and an anachronism there would have been a
serious fault. But MWS was too careful for that fault, and the proof
that the setting of *Frankenstein* is in the last decade of the
eighteenth century is revealed in a manuscript change that shows again
the care with which both MWS and PBS attempted to address this issue.
See transcription page 459, lines 4-5, in this edition for the *1818*
text where Victor remarks that he was in Oxford "more than a century and
a half" after Charles I collected his forces there—since that year was
1642, then Victor must have been in Oxford between 17[93] and 17[99],
and other evidence in the internal chronology would establish that
Victor and Clerval visited Oxford in 17[96]. That both MWS and PBS had
the 1790s in mind is further revealed by their alterations to Draft:
Vol. II, Ch. 11, page 111, lines 24-25 (on pages 458-459 in this
edition): MWS first wrote "above a century before" and then revised it
to "two centuries before"; then PBS more precisely altered the phrase to
"century & a half before," thereby designating the last decade of the
eighteenth century for the temporal setting of *Frankenstein*, a decade
that had personal and political events that MWS embedded in her
narrative.^46^

That MWS may have created her own private chronology of events in
*Frankenstein* is further evidenced by these Draft and Fair-Copy
Notebooks. See, e.g., transcription pages 15 (lines 31-32), 23 (line
13), 127 (line 25), and 537 (lines 30-31), where crucial ages and dates
are altered or omitted in order to accommodate some sequence of events
that had already been or was being established. In other places, changes
were made not in Draft or Fair Copy but between the earlier state(s) and
the first edition, as a glance at the parallel text of *1818* will
reveal: see, e.g., transcription pages 153 (line 6) and 159 (line 24)
for someone altering the date of Alphonse Frankenstein's letter from 2
June in Draft to 12 May in *1818.*^47^ Sometimes the Fair Copy is
involved in this—e.g., MWS dated one of Elizabeth's letters 18 February
in Draft, altered it there to 18 May, introduced the date of April in
the Fair Copy only to cancel it and settle on 18 May, which became the
date in *1818* (see transcription pages 537 and 647). It is clear
something was going on with these changes: there may have been not only
a chronology but also, and simultaneously, a personal numerology
dictating some of the choices. Most of the evidence suggests that it was
MWS rather than PBS who was making the choices, but there are times when
PBS, as collaborator, was respecting what appears to have been MWS's
plan.

***MWS and PBS's Collaboration in The* Frankenstein *Notebooks***

A central issue in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks is the evidence they
provide for the degree of collaboration between MWS and PBS in the
making of the novel. The nature of PBS's involvement has already been
suggested in various remarks above, the evidence of that involvement
awaits the reader in the texts of this edition, and the specifics of his
involvement are offered in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" that follows
this Introduction. But a few general remarks are appropriate at this
point in order to give the reader an overview of what might be called
the conception, gestation, quickening, lightening, and birth of MWS's
monster. MWS herself encouraged the use of such a metaphor by which to
understand her *Frankenstein*: in her *1831*


