Introduction *lxvii*

Introduction (pages v, xii) she described how she did "dilate upon, so
very hideous an idea," and she called her novel not only "the offspring
of happy days" but also a "hideous progeny" that she bade to "go forth
and prosper" in the literary world. If, as this edition will make
evident, MWS is the creative genius by which this novel was conceived
and developed, we can call PBS an able midwife who helped his wife bring
her monster to life. His "hand" is in evidence in each of the extant
*Frankenstein* Notebooks, and the "*Frankenstein* Chronology" below
demonstrates his involvement in the printing, publishing, and reviewing
of the novel. That PBS collaborated on this novel should come as no
surprise to anyone, because the Shelleys left a long history of their
shared activities as creative artists. They transcribed and they edited
each other's works; they encouraged each other to undertake or to modify
major works; and they even collaborated in the publication of *History
of a Six Weeks' Tour* at a time when *Frankenstein* was being readied
for the press. It is hoped that this edition will encourage someone to
undertake a major study of this collaboration, which extended from the
sublime (MWS's *Frankenstein*; or PBS's later response to this "Modern
Prometheus" in his *Prometheus Unbound*) to the ridiculous (the two
Shelleys engaged in a rhyming game in one of their pocket books, MWS
providing the rhyming words and PBS filling out each line).^48^

A reading of the evidence in these *Frankenstein* Notebooks should make
clear that PBS's contributions to *Frankenstein* were no more than what
most publishers' editors have provided new (or old) authors or, in fact,
what colleagues have provided to each other after reading each other's
works in progress.^49^ What MWS actually thought of PBS's involvement in
her text we will never know, no matter what methodology or facts we
bring to this issue. I personally prefer to give both of them the
benefit of the doubt and conjecture that (1) PBS suggested and made
alterations to the text of *Frankenstein* for the purpose of improving
an already excellent narrative (in [?February 1818] he wrote a review
that judged the published novel "one of the most original and complete
productions of the day") and that (2) MWS accepted the suggestions and
alterations that she agreed with. What this edition of The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks provides for the first time is the available
evidence by which to trace MWS's developing artistry as she drafted and
then fair copied her novel. Even though she grew up in a family of
writers and publishers (her father and step-mother ran the Juvenile
Library and published books for children), this was her first experience
writing and preparing a major work for publication. The fact that PBS
had greater experience, having seen two of his own novels through the
press as well as a number of volumes of poetry, might have given him a
professional edge in their relationship, but that experience did not
make PBS into a better novelist (his own novels, written before he was
20 years old, have little merit).

One of the purposes of this edition is to provide a solid and accurate
foundation for future scholarship on MWS and on *Frankenstein*, in
effect to counteract the increasing number of misinformed and misleading
judgments about the novel, about the manuscripts, and about the
Shelleys' collaboration. James Rieger (1974) was the first to mislead
when, in his otherwise excellent edition, he provocatively phrased and
overstated PBS's involvement with the text and subordinated MWS to her
husband. According to Rieger, PBS "oversaw his wife's manuscript at
every stage," corrected "her frequent grammatical solecisms, her
spelling, and her awkward phrasing," and assisted to such a degree "at
every point in the book's manufacture . . . that one hardly knows
whether to regard him as editor or minor collaborator" (page xviii).
Although these judgments reflect a great deal of truth (and
collaboration merely means to "work with" not to "equally divide the
labor"), their repetition in his "Note on the Text" that then
challengingly asked "Do we or do we not owe [PBS] a measure of 'final
authority'?" (page xliv) seemed to devalue MWS's accomplishments.

More damaging to future scholarship was Rieger's misleading statement
that "it was Shelley's idea that Frankenstein journey to England for the
purpose of creating a female Monster" (page xviii). This judgment has
misled many who without benefit of the manuscript have attempted to
understand the contribution of PBS, who did in fact write in the margin
that "I think the journey to England ought to be *Victor's* proposal"
(see pages 424-425 in this edition). But PBS wrote this *only after* MWS
had plotted the journey for the creating of the female and *only
because* MWS originally had the idea of the trip drop casually from
Victor's father, who suggested that his son take a two-year holiday
while accompanying Clerval to England. All PBS did here was to ask MWS
to change the source of the original idea for the trip, to have Victor
"lead his father to this [idea of a journey] in the conversations"
(PBS's marginal note to MWS) so that Victor would appear to be more


