*lxviii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

in control of his destiny. When PBS wrote this note, the monster had
already asked for a mate, Victor had already promised to create one, and
Victor had "resolved to fulfil [his] promise while abroard [*sic*]" (see
pages 398-399, 410-411, and 440-441 in this edition). In fact, PBS
probably did not make his marginal suggestion until after MWS had
written the later chapters in which Victor left Clerval behind in
Edinburgh and journeyed on alone in order to create the mate; in any
event (as most likely would be evidenced by the missing ur-text), PBS
was not responsible for Victor's idea of creating a mate, and Rieger's
unfortunate phrasing has misled a number of critics (see especially
"Huet" below).

After Rieger's edition came E. B. Murray's "Shelley's Contribution to
Mary's *Frankenstein*" (1978), which was based on some but not all of
the Abinger*Frankenstein* manuscripts (Dep. c. 534/1-2 only), leading
Murray to conclude misleadingly that PBS was responsible for a "thousand
or so" words in *Frankenstein*—whereas he actually wrote and was
responsible for more than 4000 words. Like Rieger, Murray judged many of
these alterations to be minor: they "merely rewrite what Mary had
written in order to provide a context for a given correction or
addition," or they offered "dictional, grammatical, or syntactical
variations." Murray added, however, that many changes were "creative
additions which . . . help to shape atmosphere, incident, character,
reader-response, and, consequently, aid in establishing the moral and
aesthetic tone of the novel" (page 51). Then, to illustrate the way that
PBS fair copied the Draft, Murray provided representative passages in
parallel texts, keying the manuscripts not to *1818* but confusingly to
*1831 Joseph.*

Comparing Murray's transcriptions to the evidence in this edition will
show that Murray, like all others who have ventured into The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks, failed at times to distinguish PBS's hand from
that of MWS. In those cases where I myself am unsure, I have employed
footnotes to query the attribution that the fonts seem to prescribe,
thereby alerting the reader to the problem of attribution. Any count of
PBS words in the Notebooks has to be factored through these queries:
that is, should only half of all the words queried as either "?PBS" or
"?MWS" be counted as PBS's? or should 75% of those queried "?PBS" be
counted and only 25% of those queried "?MWS"? There are other
circumstances that make any attempt at an exact count foolhardy. Easiest
to count, of course, are the words that PBS added to the Draft, which
were then retained in the Fair Copy and printed in *1818.* Also easy to
count are those words that PBS was responsible for when he transcribed
the final section of the Draft into the Fair Copy. Still, each of these
cases involves two different kinds of words: those that are totally new,
having been added to the text; and those that are merely modifications
of MWS's words, some of which are merely relative pronouns: see, e.g.,
transcription page 455 where PBS altered MWS's "source of amusement" to
"source of *observation &* amusement" and where he altered MWS's "that"
to "*which*" (an alteration that frequently punctuates these Notebooks).
Did PBS add two **or** three words to this page (that is, should we
count "which")? Whose word is it if PBS transformed MWS's "men" into
"*fisher*men" (see pages 478-479 in this edition)? Even more difficult
in the counting are those places where PBS transformed one MWS word into
two PBS words, changed an MWS tense, corrected an MWS spelling, canceled
an MWS word without making any substitution, or revised an MWS passage
only to have MWS learn from it and rephrase not her old text but the new
PBS text. Establishing a final and exact count for the PBS words in
*1818* is impossible, although above I have hazarded a number in excess
of 4000.

After Rieger and Murray came Anne K. Mellor's *Mary Shelley: Her Life,
Her Fiction, Her Monsters* (1988), which offered the most extensive
analysis of the Shelleys' collaboration to date. Mellor's study had the
benefit of being a balanced one, for it stressed that PBS's alterations
to MWS's novel "both improved and damaged the text and . . . must be
analyzed with care."^50^ On balance, however, although Mellor correctly
judged that PBS was "responsible for much of the most inflated rhetoric
in the text," her Appendix on "Percy Shelley's Revisions of the
Manuscript of *Frankenstein*" (pages 219-224) seems to credit PBS for
many improvements to the text. Consider the topic sentences that Mellor
used to introduce a series of paragraphs: "On several occasions, Percy
clarified the text" by eliminating such things as a "vague comment" here
or a "sloppy" phrase there; "Percy frequently substituted more precise
technical terms for Mary's cruder ones"; "Some of Percy's revisions
markedly improved the coherence and narrative continuity of the text";
"Percy occasionally improved Mary's paragraph transitions"; "Percy
several times enriched the thematic resonance of the text"; "Percy
further developed the complexity of the monster's character in several
revisions"; and


