Introduction *lxix*

"Percy stressed Victor Frankenstein's unique responsibility for his
creature." Anyone objecting that Mellor gave too much credit to PBS in
these pages is reminded to check all of her readings of PBS's hand
against the evidence in this edition and also to consider that MWS most
likely would have made some or many of the PBS improvements if she alone
had been responsible for correcting the Draft and transcribing it in the
Fair Copy.

If Mellor inadvertently gave more credit to PBS than either Rieger or
Murray, then Marie-Helene Huet has outdone them all in her *Monstrous
Imagination* (1993), which misread the evidence in Rieger and in Murray
and possibly in Mellor and which changed PBS from collaborator to
co-author. Had Huet consulted the manuscripts before publishing her
book, she would not have rashly claimed that PBS was responsible for the
"contrast between Victor and Elizabeth and the suggestion that Victor
should create a female" (page 154). Both judgments are false, for MWS
had established that contrast (what she and not PBS had called "a great
dissimilitude"—see pages 10-11 in this edition) before PBS made any
alterations, and it was MWS not PBS who introduced Victor's decision to
create a female (see above on "Rieger," who apparently misled Huet).
Huet compounded a misreading of evidence when she claimed that PBS wrote
the monster's "final words . . . 'I shall collect my funeral pile . .
.'"—a glance at pages 640-641 in this edition will confirm that MWS
wrote the sentence, and pages 769 and 816 will demonstrate the small
alterations that PBS made to the original sentence when he fair copied
it in May 1817. PBS was not the one who "wrote the dramatic denouement
on the sea of ice," and it was patently unfair to claim that "it is
impossible to assign with absolute certainty either to Percy or to Mary
Shelley *complete* creative responsibility for any part of the novel"
(pages 156, 155). The words "absolute" and "certainty" and "*complete*"
make such a statement difficult to refute, but this edition will supply
enough evidence to indicate the advisory role that PBS had in the making
of MWS's monster.

Huet had many important things to say, and it is unfortunate that she
based much of her analysis on incorrect readings of the evidence. One
good thing, however, that comes from her mistakes, is a reminder of just
how important a manuscript is to literary analysis. This facsimile
edition, of course, is both a substitute and not a substitute for the
original: future scholarly work on *Frankenstein* might begin with these
photofacsimiles, but some textual scholars may need to consult the
disassembled Notebooks currently on deposit at the Bodleian Library. In
some cases, however, this photofacsimile edition may be more useful to
scholarship than the now disbound Notebooks, because it distills and
arranges some otherwise difficult-to-interpret evidence. The mere type
facsimiles may keep future scholars from misreading words or hands or
from conjecturing in such a way as to misrepresent the composition of
these Notebooks. The very complexity of the Notebooks, for example, has
partly misled David Ketterer in his recent articles on the
*Frankenstein* manuscripts. Ketterer has done good work in his
"Readings" (1995), "Draft" (1996), and "Insert" (forthcoming, 1997)—see
"Short Titles" for the full references—but his articles would have been
more soundly based had they waited upon the publication of this edition.
Not that my reading of the evidence is the only way, but this edition
would have made it easier for him to consider, cite, and illustrate the
evidence for his arguments—as it is, his use *of 1818 Rieger* as a guide
makes some of his arguments difficult to follow. I have addressed some
of his misreadings in the Short Titles, in the Introduction, and in the
"*Frankenstein* Chronology," but I acknowledge here that my work is the
better because of the hours that Ketterer and I have debated the
evidence. Such a scholarly debate, whether conducted in public or in
private (in an Oxford pub or in telephone calls between Newark,
Delaware, and Montreal), can improve scholarship, and it is my hope that
the debate that this edition will occasion will increase our
understanding of MWS's *Frankenstein.*

At press time in August 1996, I am benefiting by reading two forthcoming
essays, both of which have been kindly provided me in page proofs:
Ketterer's "Insert" and Johanna M. Smith's "Texts *of Frankenstein*." In
both cases I have reciprocated with suggested "alterations" to these
proofs that reflect my working with The *Frankenstein* Notebooks for the
past two years. For example, while it is true that sometimes only
"tentative conclusions" can be drawn from the Abinger manuscripts, there
is no reason to hypothesize any intervening text between what I have
denominated the Draft and the Fair Copy. In fact, there is unequivocal
evidence to prove that MWS transcribed directly from the Draft (which is
in an "intermediate" state) to the Fair Copy (compare the texts as
arranged in parallel columns in Appendix A; see the false starts in the
Fair Copy that are apparently caused by the handwriting in the Draft;
and, finally, recall that the margins of the Draft were


