*lxx* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

used in the very process of the transcription to record and to calculate
the pages in the Fair Copy). In the absence of any evidence to suggest a
draft intervening between Draft and Fair Copy, there is all the more
reason to conclude that PBS's transcriptions at the end of the Fair Copy
were his alone. The rhetorical flourishes in these concluding Fair-Copy
pages, where PBS embellished MWS's Draft, not only give evidence that
these words were his but also suggest that MWS was not reading aloud
from the Draft with PBS transcribing her words. In this regard, there is
no evidence in any of these notebooks that either of the Shelleys wrote
what the other dictated.

How and when the two Shelleys exchanged the Notebooks we will never know
for certain, but there is ample pen and ink evidence to show that PBS
read sections of the text at least twice—almost all of the Draft pages
reveal PBS's hand, and many of the pages suggest that he brought
different pens and inks to his editing. He most likely read each chapter
(or groups thereof) as MWS wrote them, and then appears to have read all
of Notebooks A and B at one final sitting, probably in April when MWS
was correcting them. We know, e.g., that PBS read Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 10
at least twice: once (possibly in January 1817) he wrote in the margin
to suggest that it should be ''Victor's proposal" to journey to England;
and then later (the postmark and other evidence proving that it was
between 9 and 17 April) he read and corrected the pages that MWS
rewrote.

There are times in the manuscript when you can actually "see" MWS and
PBS at work on the Notebooks at the same time, possibly sitting side by
side and using the same pen and ink to draft the novel and at the same
time to enter corrections. We know from Sophia Stacey that in Florence
PBS "at night has a little table with pen and ink, she [MWS] the same"
(quoted in Angeli, page 97)—apparently, these were portable writing
desks that allowed the two Shelleys to work near each other in their
room at night. Evidence of that closeness is on folio 3 verso of
Notebook A, the last of the six rough-draft insert pages that MWS used
to introduce more information on Victor's scientific interests (see
pages 34-35 in this edition). MWS wrote the page in very distinctive
pale gray ink (quite different from the black ink she later used to add
"the science of" in line 18). Because PBS seems to have been the one to
have written "natural philosophy" in the same distinctive pale gray ink
and because he certainly made emendations in the darker ink, there is a
very considerable probability that the two Shelleys twice worked
together on this page between 27 October and 4 November 1816 (see
"*Frankenstein* Chronology" below for these dates).

Much more research remains to be done on the collaboration between the
two Shelleys, especially now that the pages revealing PBS's hand in
*Frankenstein* are available in photofacsimile. We all owe a great debt
to Bruce Barker-Benfield who established in December 1993 through his
Quiring Charts that all of the now separated leaves from the Draft and
Fair Copy were once part of bound notebooks, a circumstance that not
only tells us a great deal about the composition of the novel but also
more about the collaboration between the two Shelleys. As these
notebooks were passed back and forth between MWS and PBS, so also were
ideas and phrases that went into the making of *Frankenstein.* We know,
for example, that MWS took wholesale a PBS Diary entry and incorporated
it into her novel (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology" for 23 June 1816),
but James P. Carson has reminded us that collaboration goes both ways:
PBS's significant addition about the "republican institutions of our
country" (Victor here speaking about Switzerland—see pages 126-129 in
this edition), which could not have been drafted until at least November
1816 (see "*Frankenstein* Chronology"), seems to echo a passage that MWS
apparently wrote in a letter dated 1 June 1816. The nature of the echo,
however, is complicated by MWS having rewritten this now missing letter
when she prepared her Geneva letters for publication in the Shelleys'
collaborative *History of a Six Weeks' Tour* (published November 1817).
Related to this conundrum about who echoes whom are PBS's and Godwin's
later admissions in 1818 that MWS would be the perfect person to write
about the "calumniated Republicans" in a book on the Commonwealth in
British History, a subject in which PBS confessed that he was "little
skilled" (see PBS *Letters*, II, 21 and n.).

It should be clear that any analysis of these complicated
intertextualities demands a study of the facts of just who wrote what
when, as well as an understanding that some of the facts are beyond
discovery or resist reconstruction.^51^ Also required is an
understanding of what Jack Stillinger has described as "Multiple
Authorship and the Myth of Solitary Genius." Moreover, a study of this
particular kind of mutual influence


