Introduction *lxxi*

demands facing the issue of what Carson (page 449) called multiple
ventriloquisms (MWS writing as if she were Walton or Victor or the
monster; and even PBS writing as if he were MWS writing as if she were
Victor recording Elizabeth's letter). Even within the text of the novel
(which so often reflects what happens outside the text), Victor actually
corrected Walton's narratives about Victor and the monster and the De
Laceys (see pages 606-607 in this edition); consequently, we are reading
Victor writing as if he were Walton writing about Victor. Victor
himself, then, was a collaborator and an editor: he "corrected and
augmented" Walton's text because he "would not that a mutilated one
should go down to posterity"—an ideal that any writer or editor hopes to
serve!^52^

Notes

1.  Called Claire throughout this edition, Clara Mary Jane Clairmont was
    also sometimes called "Jane" by her family, which also included her
    half-brother Charles Gaulis Clairmont (1795-1850) and her
    step-sister Fanny Imlay Godwin (1794-1816). Claire and Charles were
    children of Mary Jane Vial Clairmont (1768-1841), who brought the
    two children into the family after she married the widower William
    Godwin in 1801. Filling out Godwin's family was William Godwin, Jr.
    (1803-1832). See *Clairmont Correspondence*, I, xviii, for the
    succinct statement on these relationships and for the remark that
    "Of these five children, born within nine years of each other, no
    two, apparently, had two parents in common."
2.  The summer of 1816 was the coldest and wettest on record for many
    places in England, Europe, and the United States; for information on
    the strange weather (occasioned in part by atmospheric dust from
    volcanic eruptions during preceding years), consult Clubbe,
    "Summer," pages 26-40.
3.  See "Short Titles" for a complete list of abbreviated forms used in
    citations: *1818*,*1823*, and *1831* distinguish the three major
    editions of *Frankenstein* in MWS's lifetime; *1818 Thomas*
    indicates the copy of *1818* in which MWS made holograph
    alterations; and titles like *1818 Rieger* and *1818 Crook*
    distinguish scholarly editions of *1818* by the name of the editors.
    In order to continue the efficiency of this shorthand, I propose
    that *1816-17* denominate the Draft; *1817*, the Fair Copy; and
    *1816-17 Robinson*, this edition.
4.  As MWS expanded her "story" into the Draft novel, she may have
    drafted some new sections of her novel in now lost manuscripts that
    intervened between the ur-text and Draft Notebooks A and B.
5.  I repeat this list of collators in the "*Frankenstein* Chronology"
    below for 31 October 1831. Murray, "Changes," pages 320-323, lists
    114 substantive textual variants between *1818* and *1823*; and
    *1818 Crook* adds 9 more (see page xcvi).
6.  See Walton's record of Victor's remarks in the revised Letter IV:
    "'I agree with you,' replied the stranger; 'we are unfashioned
    creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
    ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
    perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend
    [Clerval], the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled,
    therefore, to judge respecting friendship'" (*1831*, page 16).
7.  The three names of "photofacsimile," "type facsimile," and "literal
    transcript" are adopted and adapted from Greetham, page 350.
8.  In less than six places, I have used the "character" feature and
    superimposed a slash (/) over a letter when the original manuscript
    cancelation and the circumstances of the representation made such a
    different convention desirable—see, e.g., page 665, lines 13 and 14,
    in this edition.
9.  This difference has never before been identified and may help other
    editors to distinguish canceling hands in other MWS and PBS
    manuscripts.

1.  In those cases when PBS used pencil, I have suggested the medium by
    using Garamond Kursiv rather than Garamond Halbfett Kursiv (see,
    e.g., transcription page 291 for "This chapter is too short" and
    page 301 for "o you pretty Pecksie!").
2.  The "w"s in MWS's and PBS's hands were usually judged to be nearly
    identical, but on closer inspection it is clear that the middle
    section of an MWS "w" (the inverted "v") is lower than that of a PBS
    "w," where the middle ascender rises nearly to the plane made at the
    top of the "w."
3.  I physically inspected twelve of these fifteen copies—information
    about those in Cambridge University Library, the Newberry Library,
    and the Beinecke Library was provided to me by letter, fax, and
    telephone. I also made


