*lxxii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

use of the cut-and-splice photofacsimile edition of *1818 Wolf-1*
(apparently based on a microfilm of the copy from the Library of
Congress), and I address the representational errors in that edition
elsewhere in this Introduction (see "Emendations to and Anomalies in the
*1818* Text").

1.  Although PBS may have transcribed other sections of the Draft into
    now missing sections of the Fair Copy, there is no evidence
    (including comparisons of the texts of the Draft and *1818*) to
    suggest that he did so.
2.  As I confess in the "Short Titles" under MWS *Reader*, I myself
    introduced a number of punctuation errors by using *1818 Wolf-1* as
    copy-text for my *1818* version of *Frankenstein* in that *Reader.*
    It seems that texts about monsters can breed monstrous texts.
3.  That is, MWS did not paginate the entire or large sections of her
    notebooks either in advance or after she had completed portions of
    her writing. See, e.g., the photofacsimiles on pages 288, 290, and
    294 in this edition: page number "10" and the text on that page are
    both in darker ink; page number "11" has the same faint ink and thin
    pen cut as the text on that page; both ink and pen cut suggest that
    page number "13" was written before the fourth word of line 1 on
    that page was written.
4.  It is dangerous to speculate why MWS changed from foliating to
    paginating, but in the shadows of this note I suggest that she had
    first planned to use this notebook for the purposes of a rough draft
    that she could keep track of by mere foliation, that the first forty
    pages were written in a form no rougher than the surviving leaves,
    and that MWS decided to continue using this notebook for the formal
    drafting of her novel, paginating as she went along as she did in
    all or most drafts of her fiction. Such a speculation, however, does
    not account for the fact that the first forty pages of the Draft are
    now missing (for the equivalent in the *1818* text, see pages 3-7 in
    this edition).

​17. The first example of Botfield paper is MS. Shelley adds. c. 5,
folios 45-46 (two singletons, perhaps once

conjoint), containing MWS's undated fair copy of the added fourth
chapter of PBS's fragment "The Assassins," the 1815 watermark being the
only evidence that this fragment had been added to after the first part
was composed on the Continent in August and September 1814 (for more
detail about these leaves, see Editorial Commentary in PBS *Prose*, I,
384; but note that Murray mistakenly identified the watermark fancy
letters as "TW&B" rather than "TW&BB"— the initials standing for Thomas
William & Beriah Botfield). The second example of Botfield paper is MS.
Shelley adds. c. 4, folios 194-195 (two singletons, perhaps once
conjoint), containing a part of PBS's fragmentary draft materials for
"Speculations on Morals and Metaphysics," undated (for photofacsimiles
of and additional information on these pages, see Murray, adds. c. 4,
pages 218-225, 489, and 517; see also note 20 below for a Pforzheimer
fragment of "Speculations," textually related to this one, that could
well be on waste paper from Draft Notebook B). Both these examples also
show possible marks of sewing holes at their inside edges, though their
edges are too badly damaged to determine if the paper originated as
loose sheets or as leaves from a sewn notebook. There is a third
possible example of Botfield paper (MS. Shelley adds. c. 12, folio 21),
but it is too small to show any signs of sewing holes. PBS used this
small scrap of paper (with a fragmentary watermark comprising the lower
left part of a triple oval and the date 181[ ], exactly matching those
parts of the Botfield Britannia) for his undated note (?13 May 1815-?30
December 1816) to MWS that accompanied his cheque of £300 payable to
"Miss Godwin" for emergency use (see PBS *Letters*, I, 426-427). Economy
of evidence would suggest that all these leaves came from the same batch
of paper, maybe even from one folio notebook. In none of them is it
possible to be certain whether the writing was done by MWS or PBS before
or after removal from the putative notebook, but the balance of evidence
favors the idea that it was being pulled apart as a quarry for blank
paper rather than as a collective repository for miscellaneous prose:
The "Assassins" material was the continuation of a text started on loose
sheets; PBS's "Speculations" was so scrappy that their very continuity
is in doubt; and PBS's fragmentary note to MWS was clearly a loose scrap
of paper.

1.  This unique watermark of "TW&BB | 1809" in the Bodleian collections
    (Abinger Dep. c. 523) is on paper used by William Godwin to write to
    his wife on 11 September 1812 during his brief stop at Bath while
    traveling to Bristol.
2.  The Quiring Charts will draw attention to two other anomalies: two
    of the pages in "X" (folios 14 verso and 15 recto) are blank, even
    though the text passes continuously around them from 14 recto to 15
    verso (suggesting that MWS may have accidentally turned over two
    leaves as she drafted her revisions); and the pagination in both "X"
    and "Y" is erratic (partly resulting from the way MWS numbered the
    pages to identify the path through these two groups of pages). Also
    of some significance is that two of these pages (folios 12 recto and
    16 recto), namely, the beginning pages of "X" and "Y" (the first
    canceled and replaced by the second with the heading "another
    Chapter" in PBS's hand) have MWS's regular style of a page number at
    a top corner that is separated from the text by a curved line
    (represented in my type facsimiles by a parenthesis). In both cases,
    however, the number appears at the top left or inner margin of a
    recto (rather than the usual position of a page number at the top
    right or outer margin of a recto), and in both cases the pagination
    would not be consistent with the last extant page 21, an odd number
    on a verso. Clearly there was some kind of lapse between now missing
    pages 22 and 56.


