Introduction *lxxiii*

1.  It is almost certain that the paper used for the two quarter sheets
    of SC 339 (which are discussed and represented by photofacsimile in
    *SC*, IV, 733-744) originated in Notebook B: the position of the two
    fragmentary watermarks of "180[6]" and "1806" are consistent with
    the position of the watermark "JL | 1806" on the half sheets of
    Notebook B; and the measurements provided for the larger of the two
    quarter sheets (7.8" x 6.2" *= c.* 199 x 158 mm. for a quarter sheet
    = *c.* 199 x 316 mm. for a half sheet) are close enough to the
    half-sheet measurements of 199-202 x 310-311 mm. to warrant the
    likelihood of the source. Although not provable for certain without
    a direct side-by-side comparison of the actual paper in Notebook B
    and SC 399, the link between the two strongly suggests that PBS was
    drafting at least parts of his "Speculations on Morals and
    Metaphysics" at or near the time that MWS was drafting
    *Frankenstein.* Compare the link between "Speculations" and
    *Frankenstein* by way of the Botfield paper, discussed above in note
    17.
2.  The evidence for both the address and the circular double-rimmed
    black postmark is minimal, but the capital "M" on the address panel
    is clearly in the hand of William Godwin; Godwin at this time
    addressed letters to MWS as "M^rs^ Shelley" and to PBS, as "P B
    Shelley" (see transcription page 419 in this edition); and there is
    enough of the smudged and partly torn away postmark to use with
    Godwin's diary to confirm that the date is 9 April 1817.
3.  The last likely date for any revision would be 29 April 1817, when
    MWS did both "Transcribe and correct F." (see "*Frankenstein*
    Chronology" for that date).
4.  Note that MWS always canceled extended passages in The
    *Frankenstein* Notebooks with long vertical lines, whereas PBS
    always used wavy cancel lines (see pages 123 and 223 in this edition
    in order to contrast the two patterns).
5.  The wet offset ink blots on folio 42 verso (offset from folio 43
    recto), definite but out of alignment, prove that at least one of
    these facing leaves was already loose in the volume when the ink of
    the corrections was still wet—and they suggest that the leaf was
    loose when MWS drafted the revised text on folio 43 recto (see notes
    on transcription page 435 in this edition as well as the visual
    evidence on pages 434 and 436).
6.  The sewing holes of both notebooks, each at three stations, have a
    professional appearance but are not identical: the holes in C1 seem
    larger and more evident, and they are not quite aligned with the
    less definite pattern of sewing holes in C2.
7.  There are other examples of 24-leaf notebooks still intact in the
    decorative paper covers in the Abinger collection: Dep. e. 273
    (William Godwin, "Supplement to Journal" for dates in 1793 and
    1795); and Dep. d. 563-4 (from a series of notebooks used for
    transcripts by John Gisborne at Plymouth in the early 1830s).
8.  One significant notation, most likely made by a compositor, is on
    lines 14-15 of pages 680-681 in this edition, where a bracket
    (usually used by the Shelleys and the printers to mark the beginning
    of a paragraph) is used in conjunction with "[Vol. III-G121]" to
    indicate that the marked word begins page 121, the first page in the
    new gathering signed "G," in Volume III of the *1818* edition.
    Compositors often "signed" printer's copy, indicating where they
    began and/or finished setting type. For other examples among the
    Bodleian Shelley manuscripts, see photofacsimiles as well as pages
    124, 134 (n.6), and 139 in O'Neill.
9.  Later sewing holes at the top inside corner of folio 30 suggest that
    it was later tagged together with the final leaves of Notebook C2.
10. The substitute folio 31 is probably not from one and the same
    notebook that was used for the translation of Aeschylus because the
    single leaf's torn edge and half-watermark do not align with the
    edges and half-watermarks of the twelve leaves used for the
    translation, but the identical measurements between the single leaf
    and the twelve leaves (together with an identical commercial ruling)
    mean that the two notebooks were probably purchased at the same
    time. The complete watermark found on the single surviving bifolium
    (folios 73 and 84) of the Aeschylus Notebook is a posthorn in a
    crowned shield over a monogram "CB[?]"; folios 74-83 each contain
    the top half of the watermark.
11. The day after writing this sentence and the first two paragraphs in
    this section in August 1996, I encountered an excellent article by
    Bernard Duyfhuizen that skillfully addresses this important issue of
    naming. Duyfhuizen also makes some interesting remarks on the way
    that "wretch" supports a doppelgänger reading of the novel.
12. The "hideous progeny" also, of course, refers to MWS's own novel
    that she bids "go forth and prosper."
13. Even something as simple as a pronoun can implicate or incriminate
    an editor—"[he]" could have been "[it]."
14. For an often overlooked, brief, but provocative treatment of names
    in MWS's fiction, see St. Clair, "Shelley."
15. Before doing the "*Frankenstein* Chronology," I was tempted to use
    the alterations in Clerval's name to suggest that MWS drafted all or
    part of Notebook B (where "Clairval" is to be found) before she
    drafted all or most of Notebook A (where "Clerval" is to be found).
    But all other things about The *Frankenstein* Notebooks persuade me
    that could not have been the case. And Ketterer's even more
    convoluted "inward-moving spiral" hypothesis in his "Draft" essay,
    pages 254 ff., is just not to be believed, for it flies in the face
    of all the other evidence to the contrary: e.g., MWS


