*lxxiv* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

beginning her Draft in Continental Notebook A (most likely acquired in
or around Geneva) and then continuing her Draft in a British Notebook B
(possibly acquired in Bath); MWS making Journal references to the early
Notebook A inserts on 27 October 1816, to Notebook A's page "137" on 20
November 1816, and to the now lost intersection of Notebooks A and B on
5 December 1816. Ketterer bases much of his speculation on a reading of
the sequence of the Maimouna/Amina/Safie references in what I have
called the "X" and "Y" inserts in Notebook B. See my analysis of the
"Safie" name changes, all of which make perfect sense in the order in
which MWS made them within a very short period in April 1817— see also
pages 314-341 in this edition, especially the explanations on the
shadowed pages.

1.  I am indebted to Donald H. Reiman for pointing out these antecedents
    to me. Hogg in his *Life of Shelley* remarked that PBS had always
    called Mrs. Boinville "the presiding divinity 'Meimouné'. Why he
    gave her this name I could never learn. She did not resemble the
    heroine of the Oriental tale in appearance, conduct, or opinions."
    Peacock in his *Memoirs of Shelley* corrected Hogg and claimed that
    PBS called Mrs. Boinville "not Meimouné, but Maimuna, from Southey's
    *Thalaba*" (see *Life of Shelley*, II, 137, 326). For the name in
    "The Assassins," see PBS *Prose*, I, 137. See also *Clairmont
    Journals*, page 424, for a reference to a "Maimonna" who was a
    daughter shaped by her mother (Nora Crook drew my attention to this
    reference).
2.  One of the antecedents to the name of "Safie" may be found in John
    Hamilton Reynolds' *Safie. An Eastern Tale*, and it may be much more
    than a coincidence that MWS first met Reynolds just two months
    before she used the name of Safie—see MWS*Journal*, I, 162, for
    Reynolds and MWS supping with the Hunts in Hampstead on 5 February
    1817.
3.  For a recent but unverified suggestion about the name
    "Frankenstein," see Ketterer's "Name" note where he quotes "Atticus"
    in the London *Sunday Times* for 30 October 1994: "Atticus" (the
    name that Taki Theodoracopulos adopts for his column) claimed to
    have heard that MWS "decided to name the scientist Frankenstein
    after the nicest man she knew, Baron Frankenstein, the German consul
    in Geneva" at that time. Ketterer confesses, however, that his
    letter of inquiry to a German archivist in Berlin did not provide
    any corroborating evidence of this claim. Perhaps Ketterer or
    another can make further inquiries in Geneva or elsewhere. For other
    suggestions about the name "Frankenstein," see Palacio, pages 93-94,
    n.5.
4.  If the Walton story did not exist in the ur-text, then MWS could not
    have noticed or created until later (not before September 1816) the
    set of parallel initials for Walton's married sister, Margaret
    Walton Saville: MWS was writing as if she were Walton who was
    writing letters to his sister "MWS." It is possible that MWS created
    the sister's name of "MWS" (or at least the name of "Margaret") as
    early as September 1816, by which time the outside frame had been
    begun in the missing forty pages of Notebook A; but it is also
    possible that MWS did not create the sister's full married name
    until after she married PBS in December 1816 and officially became
    MWS. We know that "Margaret" was the name in the final pages of the
    Draft that were written in March/April 1817, but it is possible that
    the name "Saville" was not finally decided upon until April 1817, by
    which time the choice of the innermost name "Safie" would be
    strongly echoed by the name "Saville" if pronounced as a French
    name. It is more than possible that the choice of one of these names
    involved the choice of the other.
5.  Although there are other places in The *Frankenstein* Notebooks
    where it is much more evident that MWS copied and then canceled and
    then recopied portions of a previous text, consider a possible
    instance of this on page 44 of what is now Ch. 2: MWS first wrote
    and then canceled "The C" and then wrote another sentence and then
    wrote "The catastrophe . . ." (see transcription page 29, lines
    29-30, in this edition).
6.  See especially Draft: Vol. I, Ch. 13, where MWS canceled lines 16-25
    on her page 138 only to rewrite them at lines 22-31 on page 142; she
    also canceled words in lines 12-13 on page 142 and rewrote them in
    lines 17-19; and she canceled lines 3-5 on page 147 and rewrote them
    at lines 10-13 on the same page (see pages 222-223, 230-231, 240-241
    in this edition).
7.  Pamela Clemit does not remark on this distinction between the two
    manuscripts (Abinger Dep. 374/1-2) in her edition of MWS *Mathilda*,
    but she does print the "The Fields of Fancy" in an appendix, thereby
    enabling a comparison of the two texts. Photofacsimiles of part of
    the manuscript of "The Fields of Fancy" may be consulted in Murray,
    *d.1*; another Bodleian manuscript containing parts of "Mathilda" is
    Shelley adds. c. 5—see MWS "Mathilda" in the "Short Titles."
8.  See transcription page 561 for MWS's almost verbatim transcription
    from PBS's Geneva Diary (or from an ur-text that had incorporated
    that passage).
9.  The canceled "156" in this calculation is merely the sum of "104"
    and "52" without the "24"; and the "17" to the side may have been a
    false start for the sums of "180," one of which is off to the other
    side.


