Introduction *lxxv*

1.  Other numberd discussed on transcription pages 9, 583, and 775
    concern the pencil notations made by "R. L." who surveyed the MWS
    and PBS manuscripts for one of the Lords Abinger, providing other
    clues as to what was extant at that time.
2.  There is evidence in the form of a secret code in Godwin's Diary
    that he and Mary Wollstonecraft were having sexual intercourse at
    this time—see St. Clair, *Godwins & Shelleys*, "Appendix I: Godwin's
    sexual relationship with Mary Wollstonecraft," pages 497-503. St.
    Clair reasons that MWS was more likely conceived in November 1796 (a
    month in keeping with the birth of the monster), but the evidence
    can be interpreted in a number of different ways. And MWS may have
    adjusted the 276-day gestation period by 13 days at both ends: that
    is, conceived on or around 29 November 1796, MWS started the novel
    13 days later on 11 December 17[96]; born on 30 August 1797, MWS
    ended the novel 13 days later on 12 September 17[97].
3.  It is time for someone to create a full chronology of the action in
    this narrative, revealing such important dates as 1789 for Victor
    going off to university and 1793 for the creation of the monster,
    both years resonating with the events of the French Revolution.
    Mellor (pages 54-55, 237-238), *1818 Wolf-1* (pages 340-342), and
    others have attempted the chronology, but some murkiness in the text
    makes them get a year off here and there. (And MWS's change from 26
    to 28 May may have been the source of the problem, for the 27th
    would have placed William's death in 1794, a year more in keeping
    with elapsed time elsewhere in the narrative.) Anyone attempting a
    full chronology will need to consider not only date changes in these
    Notebooks but also the changes between *1818* and *1831.*
4.  For additional places where there are changes between manuscript and
    *1818*, see transcription pages 37 (line 22), 177 (line 15), 613
    (line 33), and 617 (line 1).
5.  For a transcription of this rhyming game (called "bout-rimés") from
    the Bodleian MS. Shelley adds. e. 12, page 185, see Barker-Benfield,
    *Guitar*, pages 128-129. For a brief consideration of this and other
    collaborations between the Shelleys, see MWS *Dramas*, page 19, n.1,
    and pages 9-10: in her fair copies of *Prosperpine* and *Midas*, MWS
    transcribed and incorporated four of PBS's lyrics that he wrote for
    these dramas in the winter of 1820/21.
6.  I have a much better sense of what this kind of collaboration means
    after having benefited from the advice of more than a dozen scholars
    who have read and improved an earlier draft of this "Introduction."
    As I indicate in the "Acknowledgments," one of these scholars, Bruce
    Barker-Benfield, was very much present in the making of many parts
    of this edition.
7.  Mellor, e.g., cautioning those who saw MWS's anxiety of authorship
    in her use of the word "author" to describe Victor, reminded
    everyone that it was PBS rather than MWS who called Victor an
    "author" of his own misery and of the monster. Mellor (page 65) was
    correct in her judgment, and now everyone can use these
    photofacsimiles to inspect the unequivocal evidence that the word
    "author" was in PBS's hand in these four crucial places. (See PBS's
    characteristic "r" [and also "a"] in each "author" on pages 228-229,
    262-263, 264-265, and 758-759 [also 813] in this edition—also
    contrast the look of MWS's "author" on pages 55-56 of this edition;
    and even see pages 22-23 where a PBS "authors" in line 6 may be
    contrasted with an MWS "authors" in line 19. Granted, there are
    considerable similarities between the two hands, but the contexts of
    each word on pages 22-23 will train the eye to distinguish MWS's
    from PBS's hand.) Being able to distinguish these two hands with
    more precision will also help to confirm and/or modify the
    fascinating research undertaken by John F. Burrows, whose
    computational stylistics has led to a conclusion that MWS (as well
    as Mary Robinson and Emily Brontë) had a style more resembling male
    than other female writers. However, even Burrows' more moderate
    conclusion that this distinction may "best be understood as
    reflecting differences of education rather than gender" (page S3.ii)
    will have to be tested against new data in which his sample passages
    from *Frankenstein* do not include text that came directly from PBS
    rather than MWS.
8.  See, e.g., the different ways that E. B. Murray (PBS *Prose*, I,
    429-446) and Jeanne Moskal (MWS *Travel Writing*, pages 1-8) have
    reconstructed the Shelleys' collaboration on *History of a Six
    Weeks' Tour.*
9.  In a final collaborative act, Nora Crook informed me about Angela
    Leighton's *TLS* review (2 August 1996) of Zachary Leader's just
    released *Revision and Romantic Authorship*, a book that I had
    overlooked but that fortunately the University of Delaware Library
    had just purchased and processed. Leader's chapter on "Parenting
    *Frankenstein*" (pages 167-205) deftly counters some of Mellor's
    judgments that PBS's revisions were for the worse, but it
    perpetuates on pages 167, 171 (n. 17), and 191 a few errors (*1818*
    was not published in March; there was no need for caution by Leader
    or by *1831 Smith* [page 274 and n.] in attributing those four
    instances of the word "author" to PBS; and at least part of the Fair
    Copy "surfaced" a number of years ago). On the whole, however,
    Leader provides an important view of the two Shelleys'
    collaboration: he makes the valid point that collaboration need not
    be "imposition"; he demonstrates that MWS was very much in control
    of her own novel; and he judges PBS's "alterations" in keeping with
    the evidence now contained within The *Frankenstein* Notebooks.


