*Acknowledgments*

I owe a great deal to many friends and colleagues who have sacrificed
much in order to come to my often frenzied calls for assistance during
the past two years. Unlike Victor Frankenstein, who put his unnamed
monster's pieces together without the help of anyone and suffered the
inhumanity of it all—and even unlike Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, who
had only Percy Bysshe Shelley to assist in the creation of her novel
about the monster—I have had many assistants in the construction of my
monster, and I have benefited from all these collaborations. The
resulting *Frankenstein* Notebooks are dedicated to the three
individuals who sacrificed the most through the long hours it took me to
piece this edition together out of its constituent parts; and the book
is also offered as a tribute to the unnamed who made so much of my work
possible.

My first debts are to Lord Abinger (who in 1993 kindly granted me
permission to undertake this edition) and to Donald H. Reiman (who
obtained this permission and invited me to edit The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks for his Garland series in "The Manuscripts of the Younger
Romantics"). The fully articulated texts in this edition started out as
a skeletal WordPerfect typescript of Mary Shelley's words that my typist
and friend Debbie S. Lyall made from the photographs of Lord Abinger's
manuscripts, a text that I corrected, positioned, canceled,
interlineated, supplemented with the Percy Shelley passages, and then
entered into columns of varying widths to replicate the manuscript. The
technical expertise by which I constructed these pages was provided by
two computer experts at the University of Delaware, Karen M. Kral and
Rich Duggan, both of whom sacrificed great amounts of time to see me
through my labors: Kral, a phone call away, made magic macros that
enabled me, e.g., to move text effortlessly into columns (what were
actually Tables in WordPerfect 6.0 for DOS); and Duggan, in the same
building with me, suffered my frequent cries for help.

Only after my initial formatting of the type facsimile of The
*Frankenstein* Notebooks was I aware that there was room to print a
literal transcript of the*1818* first edition down the right column of
each type facsimile page so that, at a glance, the reader could see
first what Mary Shelley wrote in 1816-17, then what she and Percy
Shelley added and corrected, and then what was published a few months
later on 1 January 1818. Different parts of the "body" of this edition,
therefore, were developed in the very process of its creation, and I am
indebted to Steven Olsen-Smith and Shanon Wilson, two Ph.D. students at
the University of Delaware who volunteered their precious time to
prepare a WordPerfect text of*1818* that could be incorporated into the
edition and run in tandem, line by line, with the *1816-17* Draft and
with the *1817* Fair Copy. That text was then checked for accuracy by my
reading it aloud against the *1818* first edition in the University of
Delaware Library, and I am indebted to Mary Ellen Bellanca, Charlene E.
Bunnell, Debbie S. Lyall, Suzanne Potts, and Barbara A. Silverstein for
all of their assistance in reading: they also assisted me when I checked
the type facsimile for accuracy by reading it aloud against the
high-resolution black-and-white photographs of the manuscripts; and
Bunnell and Potts checked the final layout of the edition. For the
quality of these photographs I am especially grateful to

*xi*


*xii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

the Photographic Department of the Bodleian Library (for photographing
the manuscripts) and to Debbie Handy from Garland Publishing: only after
comparing Garland's first set of 9 x 12 prints with the manuscripts in
the Bodleian Library in January 1995 did I realize that their cropped
edges and washed-out details meant that an entire new set of 8½ x 11
prints were needed, and Debbie Handy handled all aspects of that
replacement.

The "sinews and muscles" of this edition have been strengthened by the
assistance of many individuals, especially George Miller, Chair of the
English Department at the University of Delaware, who endured looking at
many configurations of my pages as I attempted to get them looking
right. The staff of the University of Delaware Library were always
accommodating, and I particularly wish to thank Susan Byrnteson
(Director of Libraries), Timothy D. Murray and his excellent staff in
Special Collections, and all of the staff of Interlibrary Loan who
obtained for me early nineteenth-century newspapers in film as well as
in bound volumes. Anna Lou Ashby of The Pierpont Morgan Library was very
helpful to me on a number of occasions, as were Doucet Devin Fischer and
Stephen Wagner of The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley & His
Circle at the New York Public Library. Others who made large and small
contributions include Dorothy A. Carroll, Pamela Clemit, Veronica M.
Eid, Paula R. Feldman, Renée Fisher, Nancy Moore Goslee, Hilda and John
Hadland, William Hodges and the staff of Duke Humfrey's Library at the
Bodleian Library, Nicholas A. Joukovsky, David Ketterer, Margaret Kulis,
Danielle McClellan, Anne K. Mellor, Jeanne Moskal, Hershel Parker,
Hélène Dworzan Reiman, Darlene A. Reynolds, Linda H. Russell, William
St. Clair, Wilma Slaight, Johanna M. Smith, Marion Kingston Stocking (as
always), and Jeffery Vail.

Special mention must be made of thirteen professional colleagues who in
June and July 1996 agreed to read antepenultimate versions of my
Introduction and of my *Frankenstein* Chronology. All of them made
valuable suggestions, corrections, and alterations, almost all of which
were singular (not repeated by the other readers) and almost all of
which I adopted. I have truly benefited from these "collaborators,"
these generous scholars who have "labored with" and on behalf of me:
Terry Belanger, Bruce Barker-Benfield, Betty T. Bennett (with whom I had
collaborated on earlier books), Nora Crook, Stuart Curran, Doucet Devin
Fischer, Neil Fraistat, Steven E. Jones, Jerome J. McGann, Mary A.
Quinn, Donald H. Reiman, Peter S. Shillingsburg, and Emily W. Sunstein.
It should come as no surprise that many of these generous people have
also published very useful books and editions with Garland Publishing,
Inc., which I wish to thank for the support they have given me in this
enterprise. Specifically, I thank from the New York offices, Audrey
Leung, Bruce Lyons, John Shea (who worked many long hours on my behalf),
and my editor Elspeth Hart (who has seen many of these "Bodleian"
volumes through the press). Those who have worked with Elspeth know how
wonderful she is—her wit and wisdom, her patience and generosity are
indeed incomparable.

One of my "collaborators" named above must be singled out: Nora Crook
(the editor of another 1996 *Frankenstein)* and I exchanged volumes of
information over the Atlantic by phone, fax, and e-mail between December
1995 and August 1996. Financial support for these transmissions came
from the English Department of the University of Delaware. The English
Department and Garland Publishing also underwrote many more phone calls
between Delaware and the Bodleian Library in the period March-August
1996. For other financial support during my two *Frankenstein* years, I
wish to thank the University of Delaware's Office of the Vice Provost
for Research, Office of International Programs, and College of Arts and
Science—as well as the National Endowment for the Humanities. And for
their support of scholarship in the English Romantics, I wish to
acknowledge the efforts of Garland Publishing and of The Johns Hopkins
University Press—a glance at the "Short Titles" will evidence how much
both publishers have contributed to studies in the Shelleys and their
Circle during the past twenty years.

My first and final debts are to my dedicatees. I have already named my
editor Elspeth Hart, and I wish here to thank my wife Peggy for all of
her support and patience during a very long gestation period: needless
to say, I missed my delivery date by more than a few days or even a few
months. We can only hope that this edition will go forth and prosper and
make the sacrifices worthwhile.


Acknowledgments *xiii*

I save the last two paragraphs to acknowledge my greatest debt to a
gentleman, a scholar, and a librarian by the name of Bruce
Barker-Benfield, a Senior Assistant Librarian in the Department of
Western Manuscripts at the Bodleian Library, Oxford University (and a
Shelley scholar who has for years overseen all of the manuscripts of the
Shelleys and their Circle in Duke Humfrey's Library). There is no part
of this edition, from its title page (verso as well as recto) to its
Appendices, that have not benefited from his direct advice and indirect
influence. His greatest presence is evident in the description of "The
Makeup of The *Frankenstein* Notebooks" in my Introduction as well as in
the preparation of the Quiring Charts and Beta-Radiographs: those who
have edited Bodleian manuscripts in the Garland series know that
Barker-Benfield always prepares for each editor a written and detailed
analysis of the physical paper, including the watermarks, quires, glue
residue, and other particulars by which a part of literary history can
be reconstructed—and with this written analysis is given
Barker-Benfield's *carte blanche* to do with it what the editor wants,
whether to appropriate or to rewrite his text. The overall effects of
Barker-Benfield's collaboration with me are also evident on every page:
he suggested naming this edition "*1816-17*" by which it could be
distinguished from and related to the "*1818*" and "*1831*" editions;
his objection to an earlier form of the footnotes led to a new formula
for designating notes about passages in the left margin; similarly, his
questioning an earlier incarnation of the shadowed areas on repeated
pages in this edition led to my much more efficient use of the right
margin to explain the textual traumas that made the repetition
necessary; he was consulted about every letter or word or phrase where
it was difficult to distinguish the hands of the two Shelleys; and his
common sense about the physical makeup of the notebooks and about the
process of the two Shelleys writing therein enabled me to make many
valuable deductions and, equally important, prevented me from making
unwarranted conjectures that would have misled future scholarship. In
short, his generous interest in the accuracy of future scholarship on
Mary Shelley's *Frankenstein* was an inspiration.

I had worked with Barker-Benfield before but for shorter and less
intense periods of time. For this edition I spent a total of five weeks
at the Bodleian (in January/February and in September 1995) checking my
type facsimiles (initially prepared by means of the photographs) against
the original manuscripts. After hours and days of solitary checking of
words, sentences, paragraphs, pages, and chapters in The *Frankenstein*
Notebooks, I would look forward to those special mornings at 9:00 a.m.
when Barker-Benfield would collect the Notebooks from the cabinet in
Duke Humfrey's Library and we would hurry down the wooden steps, exit
the Bodleian Library through a staff door, pass through the archway to
the Clarendon Building, and walk up to Barker-Benfield's private office.
Working there on *Frankenstein* was all the more meaningful because Mary
Godwin and Percy Shelley apparently visited the Clarendon Building in
August/September 1815 during their excursion from Windsor to Oxford;
moreover, even Victor Frankenstein and Henry Clerval visited the same
building during their short stay in Oxford in April 17[96]. Here, in one
building (which also housed a library when Mary and Percy and when
Victor and Henry visited), the historical and the fictional pasts were
intertwined. Here, by inspecting each leaf of the manuscript and by
attending to torn edges, ink blots, pin holes, watermarks, and other
minutiae, we reconstructed the disbound pages of Mary Shelley's
Notebooks and discovered the process by which she created her novel.
Here, the library became a laboratory, and Mary Shelley's *Frankenstein*
once again came to life.

Charles E. Robinson

Newark, Delaware

30 August 1996


