Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook A *xxxvii*

(folios 12 through 15 [pages 57/59, 60/61, 62/blank, and blank/63]) and
"Y" (folios 16 and 17 [pages 57/58 and 59+64/65], as well as folio 18
[an unpaglnated slip of different paper that is described as "Third
Insert" below]). MWS needed these extra pages in order to revise what
was apparently Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [5], a chapter that she would have
written not long after finishing a "very long" chapter on 5 December
1816, but the way the name of Safie changes from "Maimouna" to "Amina"
to "Safie" in these reconstructed bifolia suggests that she did not make
the changes until April 1817. All of these intersections between "X" and
"Y" are important because they offer the only manuscript link between
the last extant page of Notebook A (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. 3, page 21) and
the first extant page of Notebook B (Draft: Vol. II, Ch. [6], page 62).
For the *1818* text that now fills part of that gap, see pages 312-313
in this edition; for more information on these name changes, see "Naming
in the *Frankenstein* Notebooks" below; for a visual representation of
"X" and "Y," see Quiring Charts^19^ below; for the labyrinthine path
through "X" and "Y," see the likely sequence of MWS's revisions as
outlined on transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition and as
evidenced in the photofacsimiles, transcriptions, and notes on pages
314-342

**Third Insert Slip (Dep c. 534/1, folio 18—from the "Y"\` Insert):**
This third insert was written on a slip of paper that was used to link
the last page of light-blue paper in Notebook A (Dep. c. 534/1, folio 17
verso [page 65]) and the first page of cream paper in Notebook B (Dep.
c. 534/1, folio 19 recto [page 62]). The slip consists of the top part
of one leaf (that is, a half-sheet) of laid paper (commercially cut at
top and outside edges), of cream color, that measures 89-91 x 186-188
mm., yielding estimated sheet measurements of [height unknown] x 372-376
mm. The paper has no surviving watermark but is probably of British
origin. The lower edge is roughly torn (below the completed text), but
the inside edge is more neatly torn against a fold, at which (about 46
mm. from the top edge) is a hole that could well be a sewing hole
(though other tears at the inside edge make it hard to be certain). The
slip (while blank) may have been torn from another notebook, which may
have been turned to because all the light-blue paper of Notebook A had
been exhausted. The text follows directly from folio 17 verso
(completing the word "language") and concludes with a later and revised
version of part of a sentence that had been written on the top two lines
of folio 19 recto, which is the first surviving leaf of Notebook B.

**Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook A:** Additional information on the
physical makeup of the original notebook is to be found in notes
positioned at the bottom of transcription pages.

*Symbols in the Charts*

Existing leaf **|** Bifolium, still joined (or singleton and stub, still
joined)

**** Missing leaf *|* Bifolium, now separated, but former join confirmed
from matches

of the torn or cut edges

**First Insert** Dep. c. 477/1

*Bodl. MWS \
 folios pages Watermarks*

1.  \_\_/\_\_ T W *&* B BOTFIELD
2.  \_\_/\_\_ Britannia | 1815
3.  \_\_/\_\_ TW&B | BOTFIELD

(lower third torn away before writing)

**Quire** I [?10 or 12]\*{quire of indeterminable size, its relationship
to the endleaf-structure unknown) \
No surviving leaves.

\*It seems reasonable to hypothesize this missing quire by assuming that
MWS's pagination sequence coincided with the start of Notebook A. If so,
then her pagination suggests that 40 pages (20 leaves) are now lost from
the beginning of her Draft, which would have preceded the first
surviving pages 41/42 that formed the last leaf of its quire. These
numbers would yield two quires at the start, one of ten leaves and one
of twelve: the totally missing first quire may have had a one-leaf
discrepancy caused by its links with the endleaf-structure or by the
start of the text; the second quire survives with just its last leaf,
pages 41/42. This reconstruction is supported by the number of words in
*1818* that were eventually produced by the missing pages (see pages 2,
6, and 7 in this edition for the computations about Walton's
introductory Letters and part of Draft: Vol. I., Ch. [1]). This
reconstruction is also supported by evidence suggesting that MWS changed
from foliating to paginating Notebook A (see "Foliation and Pagination
in Notebook A" and note 16).


*xxxviii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**Quire II**
^[?10\\ or\\ 12,\\ all\\ lost\\ except\\ the\\ final\\ leaf]^

*Bodl. MWS*

*folios pages Watermarks*

4 41/42 ADIVONNE

Verso: glue-marks

**Quire III** ^10^

  ---- ------------- ---------------
  5    43/44         Bell (*btm.*)
  6    45/46         Bell (*btm*.)
  7    47/48         D
  8    49/50         Bell (*btm*.)
  9    51/53         Bell (*btm*.)
  10   54/55         Bell (*top*)
  11   56/57         Bell (*top*)
  12   58^A^/58^B^   ADIVONNE
  13   59/60         Bell (*top*)
  14   61/62         Bell (*top*)
  ---- ------------- ---------------

Recto: glue-marks

Number '52' omitted

Number '58' repeated Verso: glue-marks

**Quire IV** ^10^

15 16 17 18 19 20 21

22 23

24

63/64 *65/66* 67/68 69/70 71/72 73/74 75/76 77/78 79/80 81/82

Bell (*btm*.)

Bell (*btm*.)

D

Bell (*btm*.)

Bell (*btm*.)

Bell (*top*)

Bell (*top*)

ADIVONNE Bell (*top*) Bell (*top*)

Recto: glue-marks

Verso: glue-marks

**Quire V** ^12^

25

26

27

28a

28b

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

83/84

85/86

87/88

89/90

91/92

93/94

95/96

97/98

99/100

101/102

103/104

105/106

D

Bell (*btm*.)

D

Bell (*btm*.)

D

D

ADIVONNE

ADIVONNE

Bell (*top*)

ADIVONNE

Bell (*top*)

ADIVONNE

Recto: glue-marks

Verso: glue-marks


Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook A *xxxix* **Quire VI** ^10^

  -------------- ------------- ------------------
  ***Bodl.***    ***MWS***     
  ***folios***   ***pages***   ***Watermarks***
  36             107/108       Bell (*btm*.)
  37             109/110       D
  38             111/112       Bell (*btm*.)
  39             113/114       D
  40             115/116       D
  41             117/118       ADIVONNE
  42             119/120       adivonne
  43             121/122       Bell (*top*)
  44             123/124       ADIVONNE
  45             125/126       Bell (*top*)
  -------------- ------------- ------------------

Recto: glue-marks

Verso: glue-marks

**Quire VII** ^12^

46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57

127/128 129/130 131/132 133/134 135/136 137/138 139/140 141/142 143/144
145/146 147/148 149/150

Bell (*btm*.)

Bell (*btm*.)

D

D

Bell (*btm*.)

D

ADIVONNE

Bell (*top*)

ADIVONNE

ADIVONNE

Bell (*top*)

Bell (*top*)

Recto: glue-marks

Verso: glue-marks

Quire VIII

10-2 (leaves 2-3 cancelled at rime of writing)\*

  -------- --------- -------------
  *Lost*             *Unknown*
  *Lost*             *Unknown*
  *59*     153/154   Bell (btm.)
  60       155/156   Bell (btm.)
  61       157/158   Bell (top)
  62       159/160   Bell (top)
  1        161/1     Bell (top)
  2        2/3       ADIVONNE
  3        4/5       ADIVONNE
  -------- --------- -------------

Recto: glue-marks

Stub-fragm. at pp. 2/3

Large stub at pp. 161/1

Dep. c. 534/1

Verso: glue-marks

\*There are two significant points about this quire, one of which
concerns its position in the files of deposited Abinger papers in the
Bodleian Library. All of Draft Notebook A up to and including folio 62
is part of the first Abinger file, Dep. c. 477/1; the remainder of
Notebook A (folios 1-11 and 12-17 together with folio 18, that slip of
paper linking Notebooks A and B) is part of Dep. c. 534/1 that also
contains Notebook B. One of the reasons for this division must have been
that Dep. c. 534/1, folio 1 (pages 161/1) begins "Vol. II" of the novel:
page 161 (a recto) is blank, and page 1 (a verso) begins the new
pagination sequence for Vol. II or what MWS initially designed as a
two-volume novel. Possibly related to the beginning of the new volume is
page 153 in this quire, which is interesting for a number of reasons: it
illustrates MWS's characteristic vertical cancel lines; the text was
canceled because it had originally concluded the narrative of Vol. I on
page "157"; what happened afterwards, as the Quiring Charts reveal, is
that MWS tore out two preceding leaves (the original and now missing
pages "153/154" and "155/156"), which she then rewrote and expanded on
four leaves (folios 59-62): that is, on eight pages (153/154, 155/156,
157/158, 159/160), the first of which was the original page "157" (which
she altered to page "153")—see transcription page 253 in this edition;
see also my remarks in "Hypothetically Reconstructing an Ur-Text of
*Frankenstein:* Chapters (or Characters and Incidents) after the
Creation."


*xl*

The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**Quire IX** ^12-4^ ^(leaves\\ 9-12\\ missing)^

  -------------- ------------- ------------------
  ***Bodl.***    ***MWS***     
  ***folios***   ***pages***   ***Watermarks***
  4              *6/7*         D
  5              8/9           D
  6              10/11         D
  7              12/13         D
  8              14/15         D
  9              16/17         Bell (*btm*.)
  10             18/19         Bell (*top*)
  11             20/21         ADIVONNE
                 *Lost*        *Unknown*
                 *Lost*        *Unknown*
                 *Lost*        *Unknown*
                 *Lost*        *Unknown*
  -------------- ------------- ------------------

Recto: glue-marks

No remaining stub No remaining stub No remaining stub No remaining stub

+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| Insert                  | ‘X’\*                   |                         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 12                      | '57'/59'                | Bell (*btm*.)           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+
| 13 14 15                | '60'/'61' '62'*/blk.*   | D                       |
|                         |                         |                         |
|                         | *blk./* '63'            | ADIVONNE Bell (*top*)   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+

Lower corner torn off before writing Lower corner torn off before
writing

**Insert ‘Y’**

1.  '57'/'58' Bell (*btm*.)
2.  '59' + '64'/65 Bell (*top*)

18 — *blk.* Slip of different paper

[text continues from *'*65'']

\*For information on the source of the paper for Insert "X" and Insert
"Y" and on the ways they intersect in relation to each other and to the
main sequence of the narrative, see "Second Insert Pages" above as well
as transcription pages 317 and 319 in this edition. Suffice it to say
here that the original sequence of pages between page 21 of Notebook A
and page 62 of Notebook B is now missing and that these two Inserts were
most likely an extended rewrite of the lost text that was once contained
on page 57, line 1, through to page 62, line 2, of the Draft text that
is now missing.


Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook B

*xliii*

**Quiring Charts for Draft Notebook B:** Additional information on the
physical makeup of the original notebook is sometimes to be found in
notes positioned at the bottom of transcription pages.

Quire [I] ^16^

*Bodl. \
folios*

*Stub*

*Stub* [62]/63 64/65 66/67 68/69 70/71 72/73 74/75 76/77 78/79 80/81
82/83 84/85 86/87 88/89

19

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32

2 (leaves 1-2 lost before fol. 19)

*MWS*

*Pages* *Watermarks*

*Unknown \
Unknown* \
JL I 1806 \
JL | 1806*\
*JL | 1806 \
JL | 1806 \
JL | 1806 \
JL | 1806 \
Britannia "\~ Britannia \~" Britannia """ Britannia — Britannia —
Britannia — Britannia — Britannia —

[small stub at folio 32]

[small stub at folio 31] .

Dep. c. 534/1

; Stub: glue-marks

page-number illegible

Verso: glue-marks

**Quire [II]** 16 + 4 (1 scrap added at leaf 5 verso, 3 whole leaves
added after leaf 7)

33

90/91

JL | 1806

34

92/93

JL | 1806

35

94/95

JL | 1806

36

96^A^/96^£^

JL | 1806

37

[97]/98

JL | 1806

38

Added slip of different papei

39

99/100

JL | 1806

40

101/102

JL | 1806

41

101/102

JL | 1806

42

*blk./—*

Britannia

43

—/—

Britannia

44

103/104

JL | 1806

45

105/106

Britannia

46

107/108

Britannia

47

109/110

Britannia

48

111/112

Britannia

49

113/114

Britannia

50

115/116

Britannia

51

117/118

Britannia

52

119/120

Britannia

Recto: glue-marks

Number ^l^96' repeated ‘97' later altered to '100'

42v written but unpaginated 43rv written but unpaginated

Verso: glue-marks


*xliv*

  -------------------------------------- ------------ --------------
  The *Frankenstein* NotebooksQuireeee   [III] ^16^   
  *Bodl.*                                *MWS*        
  *folios*                               *pages*      *Watermarks*
  53                                     121/122      JL | 1806
  54                                     123/124      JL | 1806
  *55*                                   125/126      JL | 1806
  *56*                                   127/128      JL | 1806
  *57*                                   129/130      JL | 1806
  58                                     131/132      JL | 1806
  59                                     133/134      JL | 1806
  60                                     135/136      JL | 1806
  61                                     137/138      Britannia
  62                                     139/140      Britannia
  63                                     141/142      Britannia
  64                                     143/144      Britannia
  65                                     145/146      Britannia
  66                                     147/148      Britannia
  61                                     149/150      Britannia
  68                                     151/152      Britannia
  -------------------------------------- ------------ --------------

Recto: glue-marks

Verso: glue-marks

Quire [IV]

**16 - 1 (leaf 16 missing after pp. 181-182)\***

69 70 71

72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82

83153/154

155/156

157/158

159/160

161/162

163/164

165/[1]66

167/168

169/170

171/172

173/174

175/176

177/178

179/180

181/182

*Stub*

JL|1806 JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806 JL | 1806 Britannia Britannia Britannia Britannia Britannia
Britannia Britannia *Unknown*

-[+lst stub at folio 84r] -

- [= the 2nd stub at folio 84r] -

Recto: glue-marks

Stub: glue-marks

Quire [V] **^16^**

**- 5 (leaves 12-16 missing after fol. 94)\* \***

85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94

183/184 185/186 187/188 189/190 191/192 193/194 195/196 197/198 199/200
[201/202] *203/blk. Stub Stub Stub Stub Stub*

JL | 1806 JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806 JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806

JL | 1806

Britannia Britannia Britannia *Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown*

[stub, folio 88]

- - [stub, folio 87]

[stub, folio 86]

[stub, folio 85]

- - [stub, folio 84]

Recto: glue-marks

(Corner page numbers now missing

Stub: glue-marks

\*The missing leaf from the end of this quire (which would have been
paginated 183/184) was apparently canceled and torn out in the course of
writing, since page 182 with canceled material and the present page
number "183 " was altered from "185". Owing to the strength of the
binder's glue on the outside of the quires, the stubs of the missing
leaf and even of its conjoint leaf, folio 69 (pages 153/154), are still
attached to the first recto of the following quire (Quire [V], folio 84
recto [page 183]). An extensive addition by PBS at the inner margin of
folio 70 recto (page 155) was damaged when the leaves were separated:
fractions of it appear on the stub of folio 83 verso (page 182), proving
that the leaves were separated after PBS had added his corrections.

\*\*The last surviving verso of this quire, the unpaginated blank at
folio 94 verso, contains wet offset ink blots suggesting that there was
some writing (not necessarily related to *Frankenstein*) on the
following but now missing leaf from this quire. The glue-marks on the
verso of the surviving stub of the lost 16th leaf (as still attached to
folio 84) suggest that it was a regular gathering, but there is no
further physical evidence to allow for additional reconstruction of the
last section(s) of Notebook B.


*xlviii* The *Frankenstein* Notebooks

**Quiring Charts for Fair-Copy Notebooks C1 and C2:** Additional
information on the physical makeup of the original notebook is sometimes
to be found in notes positioned at the bottom of transcription pages.\

**Notebook C1: Single Quire** ^24\\ -\\ 6^
^(leaves\\ 1-4,\\ 6-7\\ missing)\*^

***Bodl. MWS***

***folios pages Watermarks***

Dep. c. 534/2

  --------- ------------- -----------------------
  *Lost*    [91/92]       *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [93/94]       *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [95/96]       *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [97/98]       *Unknown*
  1         99/100        Posthorn (*top*)
  *Lost*    [101/102]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [103/104]     *Unknown*
  *2*       105/106       Posthorn (*top*)
  3         107/108       Posthorn (*top*)
  4         109/110       Posthorn (*top*)
  5         111/112       Posthorn (*top*)
  6         113/114       Posthorn (*top*)
  7         115/116       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  8         117/118       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  9         119/120       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  10        121/122       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  11        123/124       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  12        125/126       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  13        127/128       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  14        129/130       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  15        131/132       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  16        133/134       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  17        135/136       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  18        137/138       Posthorn (*btm.*)
  **Not**   **bookC2:**   **Single Quire ^24^**
  19        139/140       PHIPPS & SON
  *Lost*    [141/142]     *Unknown*
  20        143/144       PHIPPS & SON
  *Lost*    [145/146]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [147/148]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [149/150]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [151/152]     *Unknown*
  21        153/154       PHIPPS & SON
  22        155/156       PHIPPS & SON
  *Lost*    [157/158]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [159/160]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [161/162]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [163/164]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [165/166]     *Unknown*
  23        167/168       1809
  *Lost*    [169/170]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [171/172]     *Unknown*
  *Lost*    [173/174]     *Unknown*
  24        175/176       1809
  25        177/178       1809
  26        179/180       1809
  27        181/182       1809
  28        183/184       1809
  29        185/186       1809
  30        187*/blk.*    1814
  --------- ------------- -----------------------

[No remaining stub]^-^

[No remaining stub]^-^

[No remaining stub]-

[No remaining stub]

\
 [No remaining stub]

[No remaining stub]

^(24\\ –\\ 13\\ +\\ 1\\ (leaves\\ 2,\\ 4-7,\\ 10-14,\\ 16-18\\ missing;\\ a\\ 25th\\ leaf\\ added)\*\*^

[No remaining stub]

- [No remaining stub]

[No remaining stub] -. [No remaining stub] .

Stub at folio 23

Fragms. of stub at folio 22 Stub at folio 21

[PBS from 24r 1. 7]

------------[Insert leaf from a different notebook]

Pp. 139-[150]: cut together (from pp. 175-186)

Pp. 153-[172]: torn together

Pp. 175-186: cut together (from pp. 139-[150])

\*The cut-marks visible on those leaves (folios 12-13, 15-18) that were
once conjoint with the six missing leaves are of identical pattern to
those of which the other halves still survive; consequently, the missing
leaves (which have scarcely left stubs as such on their surviving
halves) were presumably once present and were lost at some time after
separation. That these pages were cut after MWS transcribed her draft
into the Fair-Copy Notebook is revealed by MWS's word "said" on folio 14
verso (page 130, line 6), where half of the loop of “d” is cut away; the
other half is on the originally conjoint leaf, folio 1 recto (page 99,
line 6, left edge)—see pages 646-647 and 702-703 in this edition.

\*\*More evidence for these leaves being divided after MWS finished the
fair copying is in writing that is divided across surviving pairs (e.g.,
at folios 19 recto/29 verso, 19 verso/29 recto, 20 recto/27 verso, and
20 verso/27 recto). The stub of the lost 17th leaf (pages [171/172])
survives at folio 21 (pages 153/154) and preserves a fragment of a final
loop from the now missing page [172]. See manuscript facsimiles for this
evidence. Not represented in the Quiring Chart is folio 31 (substitute
pages 185MWS/186MWS, which has as its watermark the top half of a
posthorn.


